PQ 




UC-NRLF 


6469 
F5 




1 ill III II 


1902 
MAIN 




B M DS3 ISM 




r LOPE DE VEGA 



AND THE 



SPANISH DRAMA 



BEING THE 



TAYLOR! AN LECTURE (1902) 



BY 



JAMES FITZMAURICE-KEEfL% 



GLASGOW: GOWANS & GRAY 
LONDON: R. BRIMLEY JOHNSON 

1902 



1/- Net. 



LOPE DE VEGA 



AND THE 



SPANISH DRAMA 



BEING THE 



TAYLORIAN LECTURE (1902) 



BY 



JAMES FITZMAURICE-KELLY 



GLASGOW: GOWANS & GRAY 

LONDON: R. BRIMLEY JOHNSON 

1902 



» » f 1 • » 



». ; " » » 






T T would be an overstatement to assert, in 
•^ general terms, that the modern drama 
derives solely from the ecclesiastical miracle- 
plays ; but it is certain that in Spain, as in 
other European countries, the connection 
between church and stage was originally 
^^^^ Qr less clo se. Though ancient ver- 
nacular examples of the hieratic drama do 
not abound in Spain, it is beyond doubt 
that the popularity of ecclesiastical plays 
dates far back ; and, as it happens, the 
earliest specime n of the S panish _drama — 
which is also among the oldest monuments 
of Spanish literature — is the Misterio de los 
Reyes Magos, This liturgical piece, ot; 
which only a fragment survives, was pro-; 
duced in the Cathedral of Toledo towards \ 
the beginning of the thirteenth cent ury. 
The feast of Corpus Christi, instituted by 
Urban IV. in 1264, was celebrated with 
special magnificence at Gerona, and extant 

387213 



documents show that the expenses of staging 
such mysteries as El Sacrificio de Isaac and 
La vent a y sueno del patriarca Jose were paid 
byBerenger de Palaciolo, who died in 13 14. 
A Ke pre sent acid de la asumpcio de madona Santa 
Maria^ lately '3iscovered by Father Joan Pie, 
is ascribed to the fo iixteenth century ; and 

^ the celebrated Mtsterio de Elche^ which is 
still given annually on the fourteenth and 
fifteenth of August, cannot well be dated 

^ later tha n the fifteenth century. It is 
reasonable to suppose that some, at least, 
of these primitive pieces are results of French 
influence propagated throughout Spain by 
the Cluny monks, and indeed it can be 
demonstrated that the Misterio de los Reyes 
Magos follows the Orleans rite. Possibly 
such subjects as the Dispute entre fame et le 
corps and the Danse Macabre "^ were also 
utilized, though less frequently in Castile 
than in the other kingdoms of the peninsula. 
This would denote a slight infiltration of the 
profane element into the sanctuary. 

* For the etymology of Macabre, see M. Gaston Paris's note 
in Roma?tia (Paris, 1895), vol. xxiv., p. 129. 



The lay t heatre developed side by side > 
with the liturgical drama. Though its 
earliest forms have perished, there is evi- 
dence of its existence at a remote date. 
Spanish historians, such as Lucas de Tuy, 
mention Albigensian refugees who acted in 

V the public squares, and who held up the 

shortcomings of the clergy to the rabble's 
derision. A passage in the Siete Partidas of ^ 
Alfonso the Learned implies that some un- 
seemly pieces — -j uegos de escarni o—-wtvQ. even 
given in churches. These may be safely 
referred to a French origin. A more national 
I tradition, inspired by the Spaniard Seneca, 
was revived by such Catalan writers as 

) / Antonio Vilaregut and Domingo Masco, the 
latter of whom wrote a tragedy entitled 
Vhom enamorat e la fembra satisfeta^ which 
was performed before Juan L at Valencia 
in April 1394. It would seem as though 
this example was not widely followed in 
Castile. The passages of dialogue which ^ 
are found in Berceo, in the Archpriest of 
Hita, and in that spirited political satire 
known as the Coplas de Mingo Revulgo are 



interesting ; but they are dramatic neitlier 
^ in intention nor effect. It is otherwise with 
the celebrated Didlogo entre el Amor y un 
Viejo\ still it does not appear that this 
production by the converted Toledan Jew, 
Rodrigo Cota de Maguaque, was ever 
actually played. Nevertheless, we know 
that public representations must have been 
common before Cota's tijme, for chroniclers 
of the fifteenth century speak of entremeses 
and momos at high festivals. However, not 
till this fifteenth century is well advanced 
do we meet with the first Castilian dramatist 
whose name has reached us. Longfellow 
has enabled readers unfamiliar with Spanish 
to gather some impression of the plangent 
music which characterizes Jorge Manrique's 
dirge in memory of his father. They 
y barely know the name of his uncle, Gomez 
Manrique, the author of two liturgical 
pieces — one on the Passion, the other on the 
Nativity — each of them distinguished for de- 
votional simplicity and charm. Tq Gomez 
Manrique we also owe a play in which 
the Infanta Isabel acted as one of the Muses, 



and thus this courtly s oldier is the first to 
represent both the religious and secular 
dram a in Sp ain. ^ 

Passing by the vivacious Fray Inigo dc 
Mendoza, whose Auto del nacimiento was 
perhaps played on a profane stage, we come 
to the anon ymo us Come dia de Calisto y Melib ea^ 
published about the end of the fifteenth cen- 
tury, and best known as the Celestina, This 
is a recognized masterpiece : but its un- 
manageable length — sixteen acts, afterwards 
amplified to twenty-two, and in some editions 
to twenty-three — nullified its theatrical quali- 
ties. A contemporary of the Jew Fernando \ 
de Rojas (to whom the Celestina is most 
frequently attributed, though M. Foulche- 
Delbosc dissents) was the patr iarch of th e 
zarzuela, Juan del Encina, a sweet and 
copious lyrical poet, wTToiiT" eclogues are 
instinct with the dramatic spirit, and whose 
Aucto del Repolon suggests those later 
entremeses which are best represented by the 
brilliant farces of Cervantes and Quinones 
de Benavente. A further step in dramatic ' 
evolution has been noted in the Auto de la 




8 



P ksion of Lucas Fernan dez : the progress is, 
however, slight. The next genuine impulse 
comes from without : from Bartolome de 
Tor res Naharro, app arently a roving Spanish 
soldier of fortune, who was captured by 
Barbary corsairs, and finally settled at Rome, 
where he took orders in 1 5 1 3 or thereabouts. 
Occasionally, as in his Didlogo del Nascimiento^ 
Torres Naharro is a mere imiigtor^of Encina. 

/But, as a whole, the volume of plays which 
he chose to call Fropalladia is remarkable for 
its rare initiative and force. Here he gives 
us examples in both the realistic and the 
romantic drama : the comedia a noticia and 
the comedia a fantasia — the Soldadesca and 
Tinelaria on the one hand, the Serajina^ 
Himenea^ and Aquilana on the other. In 
each vein Torres Naharro excels by virtue of 
his craftmanship — his solid construction, his 
appropriate, lively dialogue, his gift of per- 
suasive presentation. No Spanish writer of 

^ his period matches him in dramatic power. 
He has, in a very high degree, the character- 
istics of a great leader. Yet, beyond the 
fact that he helped to draw the attention of 



Spaniards to the Italian theatre — as in the 
case of Alonso de la Vega, whose Comedia 
prodiga owes as much to Italy as does the 
Comedia de Sepuheda — the traces ^of^Xoxres 
Naharro's influence are much fainter than we 
should expect. How came this to be so ? 
Not, as has been assumed hitherto, because 
Spanish editions of the Propalladia were few; 
the work was reprinted at least five times in 
eighteen years — an exceptional success, in 
that age, for a book first issued abroad. We 
can but conjecture thatTorre^s Naharro was too t 
far in advance of his time, or (more likely) 
that his ingenuity overtaxed the limited me- 

■ m i mm i K III I 

chanical resources of the Spanish stage. Still/ 
as we find one of his metrical experiments — 
the combination of the hemistich with the 
twelve-syllabled versos de arte mayor — adopted 
in the Auto da Feira of the graceful Portu- 
guese dramatist Gil Vicente (who often takes 
Spanish for his vehicle), it may prove that 
Torres Naharro found followers among the 
interminable file of playwrights recorded by 
Canete, Aureliano Fernandez-Guerra y Orbc, 
and Sr. Cotarelo y Mori. Thanks to these 



o 



lO 

eminent native scholars — and to M. Leo 
Rouanet — the manuscripts of those who 
wrote for the Spanish stage during the early- 
sixteenth century are at last slowly struggling 
into print. But, as yet, to most of us these 
innumerable authors are little more than 
names. 

We must await with patience the results 
of research, and be satisfied to speak of what 
we actually know. After Torres Naharro, 
^the next promirf^nt figur e in th e histo ry of 
Spanish dramatic literature is Lope d e 
Rueda, whom a constant tradition, sanctioned 
by the greatest of Spanish authors, regards 
as the founder of the popular theatre : on 
this point Cervantes and Lope de Vega are at 
one. Rueda, once a silver-beater in Seville, 
took to mumming, rose to be an autor — an 
impresario as well as an author — and led his 
company over the length and breadth of 
Spain from about 1554 till his death in 
1565 or 1566. His pieces, printed in 
ij_67, reveal him as a man of many 
talents, as an imitator of the Italians, 
as a shrewd satirist of his poor pre- 



II 

decessor Bartolome Palau, as a keen 
observer of life, as a master of boisterous 
humour, and as the inventor of the bustling 
farces known as^asos,^ Thtst pasos, repre- 
sented in open ^spaces of the town by an 
author Who also happened to be an accom- 
plished actor, raised the play to the dignity 
of a robust national institution. No such^ 
popular success was attained by Lope de 
Rueda's publisher and friend, the Valencian 
Juan de Timoneda, who has found a place in ^ 
the history of literature on the supposition 
that he was among the first to essay the 
dramatic form of the aufo. Sr. Cotarelo y 
Mori has shewn, however, that Hernan 
Lopez de Yanguas anticipated Timoneda by 
almost half a century, and probably Yanguas 
had predecessors as yet unknown to us. In ^ 
the next generation to Lope de Rueda 
Cervantes praises Naharro, of whom nothing 
remains beyond a late edition of his Griselda^ 
which exists in a unique copy. 



* See the most interesting introduction to M. L^o Rouanet's 
Intermides espagnols du xvii* sikle (Paris, 1897), for the history 
of the pasos^ or entremeses^ as they were called later. 



12 



O 







o 



^ A better fortune awaitedjuan de la Cueva, P^ 
a courageous innovator in jthe romantic drama. 
It would be difficult to overrate Cuevas 
historic importance. None of his w^ork is 
perfec t, none ap proaches perfection ; but his 
explorations in the p icturesque d omain of 
national history, his w^holesjorne contempt 
for the conventional unities, his intelligent 
courage in experimenting, his suggestion of 
the capa y espada varie ty, his amalgam of 
the lyrical with th e dramatic e lement com- 
N bine to place him in the foremost line. He 
and Miguel Sanchez, the author of La Isla 
bdrbara and La G'uarda cuidadosa^ are the 
pioneers of those new methods, which were 
soon to carry all before them; and, insomuch, 
they have a surer hold upon us than the 
younger Argensola, than the two literary 
soldiers Andres Rey de Artieda and Cristobal 
de Virues, or even than Cervantes, whose im- 
mortality was won in another sphere of litera- 
ture. The essays of these dramatists have a 
value of their own, and it is not too much to 
say that some of Cervantes's entremeses in prose 
(written, as it happens, at a much later date) 



^3 

are a match for the FalstafF scenes in The 
Merry Wives of Windsor ; but, in the main,*^ 
all four accepted an exhausted convention, 
and, as all four opposed the developments with 
which Spain was shortly to be enriched, they 
must be regarded as open enemies of the 
national dramatic system. So far as this 
massive fabric can be considered as the 
work of one man, it is the work of him 
whom Cervantes, using a well-worn phrase, 
calls the monstruo de naturaleza—th^ portent 
of nature. This marvel w as Lope de Vega. 
It would be a very serious matter if it were 
true, as has been alleged, that no one out of 
Spain remembers even the titles of six of 
Lope's plays. The reproach is surely ex- 
aggerated; but it may be admitted that in 
England, unfortunately, there is no wide 
knowledge of the man or of his wonderful 
achievement, and this fact alone is an excuse 
for reviewing the chief events of his life 
— a life rich in episodes as one of his own 
plays. 
^ Lope Felix de Vega Carpio was born at 
Madrid on November 25, 1562. Biographers 



14 

declare that he was of noble descent. It 
may be so, but the great man himself loves 
to dwell upon his small beginnings, and, 
from a passage in his writings, it has been 
inferred that his father, Felix de Vega, was 
a simple basket-maker, who emigrated from 
the valley of Carriedo to Madrid. At any 
rate, the father's position in life was humble. 
We cannot take on trust the details of 
Lope's youth as recorded by his disciple — 
su alumno y servidor — Juan Perez de Montal- 
ban, whose account is often inaccurate, and 
sometimes intentionally misleading. Still, 
it is easy to believe that Lope's precocity 
was miraculous : that he composed verses 
before he could write, and that he bribed 
older boys with a share of his breakfast to 
take down the lines which he dictated. We 
have Lope's assurance that he was sent to the 
Colegio de los Teatinos, a much less fashion- 
able scTiool than the Jesuit Colegio Imperial 
where, according to his biographer, he was 
brought up. Perhaps there may be some 
foundation for Montalban's story that Lope 
ran away from school with a friend, that the 



15 

couple were arrested at Segovia, and taken 
back to Madrid by the police. All that we 
learn of Lope, the man, makes it probable that 
Lope, the boy, was a scapegrace. It seems that ^ 
his talent was recognized by the Bishop of 
Avila, who sent him to the University of 
Alcala de Henares, and the bishop's kindness 
is commemorated in the Dragontea, There is 
no sign of Lope's name in the University 
' calendars, and we can only guess that he was 
\ at Alcala between 1576 and 1581. While 
(^ there he met the heroineof his Dorotea^ the 
Filis of his early ballads. Her personality 
had hitherto been a puzzle : her mask has 
now dropped, and she is revealed to us as 
Elena Osorio, daughter of the impresario X 
Jeronimo Velazquez. This was apparently 
Lope's first direct introduction to the stage. > 
In 1582 he served at the Azores under the 
celebrated Marques de Santa Cruz, and in 
1583 he became secretary to the Marques 
de las Navas, with whom he remained some 
four years. In 1585 he is praised in the 
Galatea of Cervantes, with whom he is found 
in 1585 and 1586 writing complimentary 



i6 



verses for Pedro de Padilla and Lopez 
Maldonado respectively. 

At its worst, sonneteering is a harmless 
pastime, but it did not sufBce for Lope. 
It has long been known that at this 
period of his life he was involved in 
serious difficulties. According to the 
pious and crafty Montalban, Lope was 
concerned in a public brawl with a shady 
gentleman — un hidalgo entre dos luces — 
and, having wounded his opponent, he was 
exiled from the capital. This tale has not 
^ been veriffeS,'" and it may have been forged 
by Montalban to divert attention from the 
real facts. These are discreditable, to say 
the least. When not studying philosophy 
and mathematics Lope was usually to be 
found at the theatre, and it was at the 
theatre that he was publicly arrested in the 
afternoon of December 29, 1587, on a charge 
of uttering criminal libels against his Filis 
(Elena Osorio) and her father, Jeronimo 
Velazquez. This is not the place to enter 
upon the details which have been recently 
disclosed to us. It is enough to say that 



I? 

Lope was brought to trial, found guilty, and 
sentenced, on February 7, 1588, to exile 
from Madrid (and a circuit of five leagues) 
for eight years, to banishment from Castile 
for two years. It was further ordered that 
if he infringed the decree as regards Madrid, 
he should work out the remainder of his time 
at the galleys ; and that if he infringed it as 
regards Castile he should suffer death. This 
severity might have cowed many men. Lope 
treated tli e court with the most flagran t 
contempt, bore himself like a typical cloak- 
and-sword hero. He condescended to with- 
draw to _ Valencia, a flourishing dramatic 
centre, where he wrote plays and made useful 
acquaintances; but his absence was very 
brief. Within two months he risked his head 
by returning to Madrid, and carrying off^the 
daughter of Philip IL's Royal King-at-Arms. 
A warrant for his arrest was instantly issued, 
and a company oi alguaciles started in search 
of him. Finding the chase too hot he 
released Isabel de Urbina y Cortinas (whom 
he married by proxy on May 10, 1588), out- 
stripped his pursuers, and, by May 29^ was 



i8 



safe on board the San Juan^ which formed 
part of the Invincible Armada. Sceptics 
have doubted if he ever shared in this historic 
expedition, but there is no reason for reject- 
ing his explicit statements on this head in the 
Filomena and the Corona tragica. Sailing up 
the Channel he used his manuscript verses 
in honour of Elena Osorio as gunwads, fought 
against the dragon Drake, lost his brother 
(so it is said) in action, and landed at Cadiz 
with the best part of La Hermosura de 
Angelica^ a huge epic which he had written 
on board. 

Shortly afterwards he returned to Valencia, 
whence he passed to enter the service of the 
fifth Duque de Alba, of whose household he 
was still a member as late as April, 1595. 
Subsequently we find him attached as secre- 
tary to other great nobles — the Marques de 
Malpica, the lettered Marques de Sarria, 
who is best known (under his subsequent 
title of the Conde de Lemos) as the patron 
of Cervantes. Lope's first youth was now over, 
but the profligacy of his private life continued. 
In 1596 his wife died, and next year, as it 



19 

seems, he met the Camila Lucinda, to whom 
many of his sonnets are dedicated. Hitherto 
Lucinda's identity has been a mystery. There 
need now be no hesitation in accepting the 
conjecture made, independently of each 
other, by Dr. Perez Pastor and Professor 
Rennert : that she was Marcela de Luian, . . 
mother of that gifted, wayward boy. Lope 
Felix del Carpio y Lnjan, and of Marcela, a 
charming poetess, to whom her father dedi- 
cated £/ remedio en la desdicha just before her 
profession as a Barefooted Trinitarian in 
1621. In 1598 Lope de Vega married Juana \/\j 
de Guardo, and the factTKaFfhe lady^ fbftuhe 
— or, rather, her father's — had been made by 
selling pork is recorded by the saturnine 
Gongora in a sonnet which is compact of 
malignity and contempt. But it is fair to 
say that none of Lope's countless enemies 
seriously believed him to be a fortune-hunter, 
and in truth his father-in-law was the sorriest 
of misers. In 1605 Lope made acquaintance 
with that young Duque de Sessa, to whom, 
during a friendship which lasted for thirty 
years, he addressed so many of the mis- 



20 



r 



chievous, unedifying letters which have 
amused and startled posterity. With all his 
outrageous follies, we must suppose the 
disorderly genius to have had glimpses of 
better things, and at whiles his aspiration for 
improvement expresses itself in odd forms. 
In 1609, though still a layman, he became a 
Familiarof the Holj^^^L^ but he 

evidently failed to conciliate all his foes, for 
in the December of 1 6 1 1 an attempt was 
made on his life in the streets of Madrid. 
In 161 2 he joined a quarrelsome literary 
society called the Academia Selvaje, forgot 
his glasses at one of the sittings, and borrowed 
Cervantes's spectacles, which he describes as 
being " like badly poached eggs." In August, 
1 61 3, Juana de Guardo died, and, in the 
following year, the widower was ordained 
p riest. I t might well be thought (as TicTcnor 
thought) that time and many trials had 
tamed his restless spirit, and that at last he 
had found peace. Not so : his repentances, 
his abjections were passing moods. It would 
serve no good purpose to particularize the 
gross irregularities which brought shame 



21 



upon his grey hairs and his cassock. Every- 
one knows that, after a short experience, 
Samuel Johnson declined Garrick's invitation 
to go behind the scenes. Unhappily for 
Lope, his existence was passed in the green- 
room, and he had not a spark of Johnson's 
dogged virtue. We can never forget it, the 
theatr e was h is life: when not writing for 
the stage he was acting a part. He must 
have suffered bitterly, the dishonoured man, 
under the tempest of epigrams, flouts and 
jeers with which the tribe of jealous, lesser 
wits beset him. Even the good-natured 
Cervantes joined in the outcry against the 
shameful specta,cle of this elderly gallant in 
a gown. It is indescribably pathetic to 
watch the poor, fallen priest's efforts to save 
himself from perdition. Soon after his 
ordination he revolts at writing Sessa's love- 
letters, implores his patron for the love of /^^ 
God not to make him jeopardize his soul. 
And he stands his ground under circum- 
stances of great difficulty. But not for long. 
The year 1616 was calamitous for Lope. 
His son and namesake proved so uncon- 



22 

trollable that the distressed father was com- 
pelled to place him in a sch ool of co rrection 
or jreformatory. In this sam:e year befell 
the fatal meeting with Marta de Nevares 
Santoyo. The cynical story of this adven- 
ture fed the gossips of the town. The 
vigilant, virtuous Gongora (who, as the chief 
r^ of the cultos^ naturally looked on Lope as his 
most dangerous opponent) was forthcoming 
with a lampoon that is still a model of 
scurrility, irony, and disdain. The hurricane 
of opprobrium, the shame of exposure would 
have overwhelmed any other man. Even 
Lope staggered under it. Yet he lived the 
hubbub down, and came into his own 
again — repute, respect, and admiration. It 
seems a mockery that iniquity should so 
triumph. But Nemesis can wait patiently. 
Within a short while Marta lost her sight 
and became insane ; and years afterwards the 
child of this sacrilegious union was destined 
to destroy Lope. But it would be odious 
to dwell on this — the last of the many scandals 
that degraded him while living, and that 
still tarnish his splendid name. Hence- 



23 

forward we see him, for a long term of 
years, reigning as the autocrat of Spanish ^ 
literature, throwing off one masterpiece after 
anotHer,'"aazzling all Spain with his creative 
power, the radiance of his imagination, and 
the inexhaustible ingenuity of his wit. For 
at least a quarter of a century he had such a 
succession of triumphs as no other man 
of letters has ever tasted. He defied public ^ 
opinion by dedicating La Viuda valenciana to 
Dona Marta in 1620: he opposed the 
fashionable mode of culteranismor But all i / 
things were forgiven to him ! The gibes of 
Gongora and Villamediana had no effect. 
It was in vain that an envious man of genius 
like Ruiz de Alarcon, or a peevish pedant 
like Torres Ramila, vented their spite and 
rage. They broke their teeth upon the file : 
they were repaid in kind. There was never 
a more human genius than Lope : one more 
loyal to his friends, one readier to face his 
foes. And, perhaps, because ot this lavish 
generosity and bravery, we are all prone — 
like his contemporaries — to sympathize with 
him, to pardon him, even when he least 



i 



24 

deserves it. No assault could shake him. 
All that is known of his later years testifies 
to his unique position. We meet him in 
1620-22 presiding at the feasts in honour of 
St. Isidore's canonization, conferring a prize 
on the boy Lope in whom he took so justifi- 
able a pride, and introducing his successor 
Calderon to public notice with words of 
enthusiastic praise. In 1624 we find him at 
an auto defe^ where a wretched, crazy Catalan 
Franciscan was burned for heresy ; and that 
Lope's heart was not in this horrible business 
appears from his flippant remark to Sessa 
that the victim was '' a low fellow, for this 
is the kind they burn." Perhaps no o ther 
living Spaniard would have dared to crack 
these jests in Madrid at the expense of 
the I nquisition — to which he himself 
belonged. It is a commonplace that no man 
really believes in his religion until he can 
afixDrd to joke about it. If this be a true 
test, then there can be no doubt that Lope 
de Vega's belief was sincere and profound; 
but there are other and better grounds for 
thinking so. In 1625 he joined the Congre- 



25 

gation of St. Peter, to which he became 
chaplain three years later ; and, in this post as 
in all others, he played his part to perfection, 
edifying all beholders by his pious works, his 
exemplary life. And from now till the last 
act, it is one unbroken crescendo of applause. 
Lope witnessed, so to say, his own apotheosis. 
He was one of the sights of Madrid. As 
he returned from the hospital, where he 
attended the sick and dying, men turned to 
look at him in the street; women and children 
clustered round him to kiss his hand, to 
crave his blessing. His daily walk was as 
a royal procession : his portrait hung on the 
walls of palaces and cabins. So contem- 
poraries tell us, and so we love to picture 
him in his august old age — the living 
symbol of all the might, and pride, and 
glory of heroic Spain. 

The last months of his existence were 
troubled by two grievous trials, to which 
Montalban alludes with an air of provoking 
reticence. We know at last what the trials 
were which struck Lope down in the pleni- 
tude of his fame and his happiness. His son. 



26 



Lope Felix, was drowned at sea; his youngest 
and favourite daughter, Antonia Clara, fled 
from home in circumstances which bespeak 
the blackest ingratitude to the illustrious 
father who doted on her. This retribution 
for his far-off sins broke Lope's heart. 
Brooding sullenly upon his sorrows, he sank 
into alternations of lethargy and despair, 
redoubled his pious practices, lashed himself 
with his discipline till the walls of his room 
were bespattered with blood, and awaited the 
end with morose impatience. On August 
23, 1635, he wrote his last poems — a sonnet, 
and El Siglo de oro — laid aside his pen, was 
chilled, anS'took to his bed. Four days later, 
after observing to Montalban that it is nobler 
to be good than great, he fell into the ever- 
lasting sleep. He was buried with such 
pomp as befits a Caesar, the funeral train 
turning aside from the direct path to defile 
before the convent which his daughter, Sor 
Marcela de Felix, had entered fourteen years 
before. By his open grave the murmur of 
envy sank into abashed silence. All men 
felt that a great light had gone out. His 



27 

remains were laid in the vault beneath the 
high altar of $t. Sebastian s Church in the 
Calle de Atocha, and there they rested till 
early in the last century. During one of the 
usual cleanings of the church the coffin was 
carelessly removed, and it was found impos- 
sible to identify it later. Hence, the precise 
spot where JLope's ashes now lie is unknown. 
His celebrity, we have seen, was unparal- 
leled in his own lifetime. The word Lope, 
as Quevedo tells us, became a synonym for 
every kind of excellence. All that his 
enemies could do was to make the worst 
of his open dissipations. They lost no 
opportunity, and they so far succeeded that, 
in an age when decorations were prodigally 
bestowed, they prevented his receiving the 
insignificant marks of official distinction : 
even the livings to which he was presented 
were paltry. It was better so. His genius 
was pure ly popular , and he could never have 
submitted gracefully to the restraints which 
bind a Court singer. He made a moderate 
fortune by his plays: he received^princely 
sums — not only from Sessa, but — from other 



28 



admiring patrons. However, though his 
household was on a modest footing, he was 
alway s presse d for money. He gave-without 
stint in charity, and he died poor. He 
had many afflictions to crush him ; yet he 
lived every day of his life, did the work 
of twenty men, and we cannot doubt 
that — on the whole — his long, tumultuous 
existence was a happy one. We see him 
in the ardour of aggressive youth, and 
watch him, still battling, in the zenith of 
his renown. But we like best to think of 
him under another aspect during the last 
decade of his career : composing master- 
pieces as easily as he breathed, and conscious 
that, after countless combats, the victory is 
his. We perceive him rejoicing in the 
calm autumnal splendour of his fame, but 
never more content than when playing with 
his children in the garden. It is a charming 
picture : the tiny house in the Calle de 
Francos, with its motto — 

Parva propria, magna. 

Magna aliena, parva. — 
and the little garden with (as he smilingly 



29 

informs us) its fountain and its nightingale, 
its two trees, ten flowers, two vines, an 
orange-plant, and a musk-rose. 

His fertility and constancy were pro-\ 
di gious. He wrote epics, novels, eclogues, 
epistles, sonnets, occasional verses, parodies ; 
poems parrative and devout and historic ; 
pastorals lay and sacred. He is the author 
of numerous ballads, w hich are among the 
richest treasures of the romanceros^ and which 
would suffice to make the reputation of any 
lesser man. Scarron is remembered not least 
for three celebrated sonnets : * it tells its 
own tale that all three should be literal 
translations from Lope — and that Lope can 
afford not to claim them. His ambition was 
as boundless as his versatility. He was the : 
first in Europe to write an operatic libretto," 
longed to win a name inKistory, and sought 
to be appointed official chronicler. He 
piqued himself on his epics, and looked 



* (a) Superbes monuments de Porgueil des humains; (b) Un 
mont tout h^risse de rockers et de pins; (c) A l' ombre dun 
rocker sur le bord dun ruisseau. The originals will be found 
in the 1634 edition of Lope's Rimas kumanas y divinas^ pp. 28, 
5, and 36> 



30 

down upon his dramas as trifles — cosas de 
entretenimiento. He lived to know better, 
and we cannot be too grateful that circum- 
stances drove him to cultivate unceasingly 
the art in which he had no equal. Yet the 
very volume of his production has terrified 
posterity. Fox was a most courageous 
reader, but even he blenched and began 
to make excuse when his nephew, Lord 
Holland, talked of introducing him to 
Lope's twenty-one million three hundred 
\ thousand lines. Hazlitt, in his Table-Talk^ 
testily remarks : — " I hate all those non- 
sensical stories about Lope de Vega and his 
writing a play in the morning before break- 
fast. He had time enough to do it after.'* 
But had he ? This depends on the laws of 
demand and supply which Lope, like the 
rest of the world, was forced to obey. As a 
matter of fact, there is no reason to suppose 
that Lope ever did write a play before break- 
fast ; but there is solid ground for thinking 
that not once or twice, but oftener, he com- 
posed a play within twenty-four hours. He 
plainly tells us so in the Egloga a Claudio, He 



31 

reports it, in no spirit of arrogant boasting, 
as the humble truth ; he simply accepted 
the fact that " long runs " were almost un- 
known in Spain, and he was easily equal to 
any conditions. 

As to the number of his dramas, we like- 
wise have Lope's own account of the matter, 
and this should be final. However, though 
there is no warrant for thinking that his 
report is deliberately exaggerated, it is 
evident that he had no skill in figures. In 
the Peregrino en su patria he supplies us with 
a list of his plays up to the end of the 
year 1 603. By his reckoning the total is 230 ; 
by ordinary counting it is 219. In the Arte 
nuevo de hacer comedias en este tiempo of 1609 
he mentions that he had then written 483 
plays. In the Oncena Parte of his theatre, 
published in 161 8, he speaks of 800 plays. 
This is clear enough as it stands. But 
it so happens that, during the same year. 
Lope issued a revised list of his pieces in the 
sixth edition of the Peregrino^ and there he 
states that this corrected catalogue contains 
the titles of 462 plays. His arithmetic is 



32 

once more at fault ; his list contains only 
333 titles. Assuming, however, that the 
number was really 462, how came he to 
omit the other 338 plays required to make 
up the total of 800 given in the Oncena 
Parte ? The discrepancy is so great that it 
can scarcely be due to a mere oversight. 
However this may be, all Lope's subse- 
quent declarations support the view that the 
higher number was correct. In Parte 
Quincena of his theatre he asserts that he had 
written 900 plays up to 1620 ; in the 
Vigesima Parte of 1625 the number rises to 
1070 ; and in the Egloga a Claudia of 1632, 
which contains the author's last word on the 
subject, the total is given as 1500. This 
total is corroborated by Montalbaii in Para 
Todos^ which also appeared in 1632 ; and 
four years later, in the Fama pdstuma^ Mon- 
talban alleges that Lope wrote 1800 plays 
and over 400 autos. It would follow from 
all this that between 1625 and 1632, when 
Lope was over sixty years of age, he pro- 
duced more than sixty plays a year; and 
that between 1632 and 1635, when he was 



. 33 

over seventy years of age, broken in health 
and worn out with private sorrows, he wrote 
at the rate of a hundred plays a year. These 
figures are bewildering. It is true that 
Montalban died insane within two years of 
publishing the Fama postuma^ and it is quite 
possible, as has been suggested, that his 
mind was already affected when he made his 
surprising statements. But his previous 
assertion tallies with Lope's, and nobody 
pretends that Lope was out of his wits. 
Perhaps there is little difficulty in believing 
that a man who could write sixty plays a 
year might spur himself to write a hundred 
in the same space of time. We need not 
presume to understand these difficult calcu- 
lations. We are solely concerned with what 
has come down to us, and this is more than 
enough for the hardiest student. It may be 
that some of Lope's plays exist with the 
names of other dramatists attached to them. 
He can spare them. As it is, we know the 
titles of more than 600 plays by Lope, but 
of these 178 are titles and nothing else. 
The existing remnant consists of 430 plays 



34 

and some ^£fty autos. Among these are such 
early pieces as Los hechos de Garcilaso de la 
Vega^ and £/ verdadero amante (written when 
the author was twelve, but re-touched later); 

'' and there are examples of his various 
manners at every stage. It is possible that 
some of his best plays are lost ; yet we 
cannot conceive that only the worst have 
been preserved, and at least we have enough 
material to enable us to judge the range of 

. his singular talent. 

It is hard to say when Lope's dramatic 
gift was first recognised, but we know on 
the best authority that Cervantes abandoned 
the stage in 1587, and that soon afterwards 
— luego — the marvellous youth carried all 
before him. He began as an j.rnateur, giving 
his plays to needy managers, and thinking it 
ungentlemanlike to be paid for them. Like 
Byron, he revised his opinion. From 1590 
he had no rival injhe theatre ; but he con- 
tinued to believe in his epics, and did not 
trouble to collect his dramatic pieces. These 
were a means of livelihood : they were not 
(so he imagined at this tirne} literature. £/ 



35 

Perseguido was the first of Lope's plays to be 
printed, and this was published in 1603 by 
an enterprising, unscrupulous bookseller at 
Lisbon. Lope seems to have taken no special 
interest in the issue of the first eight volumes 
of his theatre : at the most, his attitude was 
one of benevolent neutrality. He prepared 
for publication the ninth volume, which was 
printed in 1617 ; still, though by this time 
he had realised that his plays were no less 
valuable than his " serious works," his inter- 
vention was chiefly due to his desire to pro- 
tect himself against pirates who printed his 
dramas in editions which teemed with 
absurd blunders. And he soon tired, for, 
though he wrote as copiously as ever, he 
himself printed no play after 1625. At the 
very end he seems to have repented of his 
negligence : he collected enough matter to 
fill two volumes, which were published 
posthumously. 

It remains to examine the value of Lope's 
contribution to the theatre in which he is 
the greatest figure. He is commonly 
described as the founder of tHe national 



36 

drama^ and, in a sense, t he description is just. 
There were, as we know, hosts of play- 
wrights in Spain before he was born, but 
their efforts were tentative : essays of great 
merit, and yet only essays. It is not clear 
that Lope had any intimate acquaintance 
with their work, and his allusions to his 
predecessors are mostly perfunctory. How- 
ever, even if he had read them, he would 
still deserve the title which has been con- 
;= ferred on him ; for he cr eated the S panish 
theatre in its final perfect form. Building 
by inspiration, he builded better than he 
knew. One of the greatest practitioners in 
art, he was the poorest theorist in the world. 
I In his Arte nuevo de^jDaxer_comsdias en este 

tiempo^ he presents a poetic summary of his 
doctrine. Montalban, writing in 1632, says 
that the master had compiled a more elaborate 
treatise which was to appear shortly ; but, 
as this has vanished, we must rely on the 
curt exposition published twenty-three years 



* An admirable edition of the Arte nuevo is given by M. 
Alfred Morel-Fatio in the Bulletin hispanique (Bordeaux, 1901), 
vol. iii., pp. 365-405. 



37 

earlier. Lope makes a show of quoting 

Aristotle, but all his learning is derived 

from Donatus and from Robertello d'Udine, 

the latter of whom was studied later by 

yCorneille. It soon appears that Lope's pro- 

/ fessed admiration for classic doctrine is con- 

\ / fined to words. He avows with effrontery 

\ / that, when it comes to writing, he locks u p 

u Plautus and Terence — not because he disap- 

' proves of either, but because the public will 

have it so. He cannot follow Lope de 

RuecTa""; for, though Rueda observed the 

rules of art, he brought low characters upon 

the scene, and so made broad farce of what 

should have been high comedy. Lope 

advocates unity of action : as to unity of 

time he enters the plea that, when Spaniards 

go to the play, they wish the panorama of 

the world to pass before them — from 

Genesis to Judgment Day. He notes that 

dramas were formerly in four acts — " went 

on all fours like children," is his phrase : he 

counsels condensation into three acts. Like 

Virgil, Ben Jonson, QuTntana, Coleridge, and 

Mr. Yeats, he would have the maker write 



38 



* his first dcaft^in ptQSe* and he emphatically 
recommends that the interest be kept alive 
by withholding the solution ^till the last 

' possible moment. To this he adds a word 
concerning form : decimas shou l d be used for 
plaints ; the _sonnet serves to i ndicate 
suspense ; the romance suits narrative 
which may also (and perhaps more happily) 
be moulded into octaves ; tercets are adapted 
for graver episodes, while nothing becomes 
a love-passage like the redondilla. He closes 
with the confession that, of the 483 plays 
which he had hitherto written, all but six 
were constructed in defiance of art ; and, 
with this thrust at pedantry, he takes leave 
of the Madrid Academicians. Some earnest 
students have sought to identify the six plays 
of which Lope speaks ; but surely it is plain 
that these six perfect ones never existed, that 
Lope does not attempt to make a case for 
himself, and that he comes as near banter as 
proper politeness to his hosts allows. It is 
perhaps as well. His genius j^yjjcrea^^ : 
it was as uncritical as Cervantes's own. 
Probably if his lost treatise were discovered 



39 

it would prove less valuable and efFective 
than Tirso de Molina's bold apology for 
the new drama. Tirso, in the Cigarrales \l ^ ' 
de Toledo^ faces the issues, vindicates the new ! 
system, rejects the unities, justifies the 
mingling of comedy and tragedy, and for- 
mally acknowledges Lope as the reformador 
de la comedia nueva. It needed no courage to 
uphold the coinedia nueva in 1624 • ^^ battle 
was already decisively won. 

Tirso ascribes to modesty Lope's avowal 
that, in leaving the old paths, he pandered 
to the vulgar. No doubt the position was 
embarrassing. Lope could not glorify the 
new drama without glorifying himself, and 
good taste may have kept him silent. He 
turned the difficulty by paying lip-homage 
to the conventional rules of poetics and 
dramaturgy, as tKese"ruTes" v/efe understood 
during the Renascence. But, in truth, he 
felt no interest in them, and it would have 
been strange if he had, for his glory had 
been won by scattering all these sterile 
dogmas to the winds. He was not to be 
tied down to such an absolute division or 



40 

styles and manners as had hitherto obtained. 
He put an end t o the simple classificatio n, of 
plays as tra gedies an d farc es : he conceived 
the comedia which fused the most diverse 
elements into />nc spacious whole, and by 
this invention he was enabled to represent 
his age, to enthral his public, and to developp 
his own amazing powers. He wrought to 
such purpose that the path which he cut out 
for himself, and by himself, became the main 
road. He pictured contemporary modes 
and humours with unflagging vivacity and 
unshrinking truth. He opened up the 
treasures of historic legend, transforming 
indistinct types and hard automata into 
living beings, all touched with something of 
his own urbanity- He created character, 
he enchanted with his transcripts of emotion 
and passion, he excelled in fancy, in ingenuity, 
and in the chivalrous courtesy which led him 
to make his heroines the most delightful in 
the world. In the Fama postuma Montalban 
tells us that Lope would never suffer anyone 
to speak depreciatingly of women, and we 
should have guessed as much from the 



41 

evidence of his plays. And, in addition to 
all this, he captivated by the brilliance of 
his treatment. There is nothing in the"^ 
methods of his successors which amounts to 
a new departure. Calderon himself does 
not attempt to rival his master's constant f 
wealth of metrical design ; a design so | 
elaborate in ornamentation that, as Chorley 
has said, " one knows not which to admire 
most — the taste of a populace which this 
fine workmanship was made to please, or 
the mastery of invention and language 
required to produce it with such ease and 
abundance." * Nowhere is there a trace of 



effort, and, if we regard Lope s work as a 
whole, we shall marvel at its high level \ 
of excellence. 

That it has manj^fects Js jtrue : it could 
not be otherwise in so vast a structure. 
The Euphrates, says Callimachus, is a 
mighty river ; but it bears all the dead 
dogs of Babylon to the sea. The topical 
Spaniard of his age. Lope incarnates all 

* See J. R. Chorley, Notes on the National Drama of Spain 
in Eraser's Magazine (London, 1859), vol. Ix., p. 59, 



42 

Spain's wealuiess^ as , he incarnates her 

strength. He has the southern tendency 
to be content with^^ b^^^ 

He improvizes with a speed and copious- 
ness which do not allow of Un varying and 
\ minute perfection. Such plays as Roma 
abrasada and the Comedia de Bamha are 
wholly unworthy of him. There are un- 
mistakable^ signs of carelessness in one scene 
upon another, and, though his autographs 
prove that he was ruthless in revising, he 
did not escape disasters. Thus, in the third 
act of ha Nina de plata^ he seems to mistake 
the names of his characters, assigning to 
the niece Dorotea speeches which should 
obviously be delivered by her aunt Teodora, 
and to Teodora lines which should clearly 
be spoken by Dorotea. This last example 
suggests a probable explanation of many 
blemishes in Lope's theatre. His pieces 
were constantly printed without his per- 
mission, and, as he declares in £/ Peregrino 
en su patria^ they were so travestied in this 
process that their author often failed to 
recognize them at sight. For one line of 



43 

his own, he protests, they contain a hundred 
by some one else. This is credible enough 
to those who know how these pirated copies 
were obtained. The chief culprit seems 
to have been a certain Luis Ramirez de 
Arellano, who undertook to supply pub- 
lishers with the text of any piece after three 
hearings. It is not surprising that, on one 
occasion, the famous actor Sanchez refused 
to go on with Lope's Galdn de la Membrilla 
until Ramirez de Arellano was turned out 
of the pit. This person was Gran Memoria^ 
and there must have been more than the 
one Memorilla of whom Lope tells us — 
men quick to learn a few verses in each 
act, to fill in the rest with their own 
vapid wit, and to sell their detestable concoc- 
tion to provincial managers who then played 
the piece all over Spain as a comcdia famosa 
by the Phoenix, Lope de Vega. But this 
excuse is not always available. Lope took 
a most inartistic joy in a me re tour de for ce. 
El Arauco domado is a case in point. It 
scarcely deserves the severity of the younger 
Moratin's reproaches, if we remember that it 



44 

was dashed off in reply to a direct challenge 
thrown down by Belmonte Bermudez, Guillen 
de Castro, Mira de Amescua, Ruiz de Alar- 
con, Velez de Guevara, and four others who 
combined to produce a play which should 
be as a manifesto of revolt against Lope's 
suzerainty. El Arauco doma^o is his answer to 
the daring nine who had proclaimed them- 
selves the foremost writers of the time— '' in 
spite of envy.'^ And from a personal point of 
view, the answer was a triumph, for it 
chased the rival piece from the boards. A 
too frequent repetition of these victories has 
cost Lope dear. 

It may be asked whether he possesses the 
magical quality of distinction. Now, it is 
sometimes argued that Spanish literature, as 
a whole, is lacking in distinction. This is 
a hard saying. Distinction does not abound 
to excess in any modern literature. Still, as 
*" regards Spanish, it is found in each vehicle, 
in writings dealing with every subject — in 
poetry or prose, in devout works, in history, 
and in fiction. Santillana has it in half-a- 
dozen songs ; Hurtado de Mendoza has it in 



J. 



45 

the Guerra de Granada; it is present even 

in Lazarillo de Tormes. The mystics are rich 

in it. Juan de Valdes and Luis de Leon 

have it in a high degree. Santa Teresa has 

it no less than Madame de Sevigne. In the - 

next literary generation distinction is a less 

constant note. Cervantes and Gongora have [ 

it at times ; Cervantes, w^hen the Knight 

himself speaks : Gongora, before the demon 

of culteranismo possessed him. We may say r^ ^ 

the same of Lope. At his best he is 

eminently distinguished and, though he con- ..^^j^cuM^ 

descends to culteranismo^ — even in such plays J 

as Los Tellos de Meneses^ — he sins against the 

light. At heart he never made the blunder 

of confounding distinction w^ith mannerisms, 

mincings, and affectations, and he never loses 

himself for any length of time. When he 

chooses, he can be as simple, strong, direct, 

and lofty as any v^riter in Spain ; sublime as 

Calderon, v^ithout any of the flamboyant 

preciosity w^hich mars many of Calderon's 

best passages. 

But, after all, it is as a great inventor that | 
Lope must be honoured. H e imagined ; 




46 

that he was the first to place upon the 
boards the gracioso or figura del donaire — a 
character which™ractuany found in Torres 
Naharro eighty years earlier. Still, he 
humanized the sketches of his forerunners 
to such an extent that his alert, vital humour 
evolved a new type which amounts, in 
fact, to an independent creation. It has been 
asserted that " nowhere throughout the 
Spanish drama can you find a character." 
Shakespeare, of course, stands alone. But I 
agree with Chorley in thinking that, with 
this single exception, the Spanish character- 
plays are a match for those produced by 
any theatre in the world. In this kind 
Lope's Perro del hortelano and his Esclava 
de su galdn speak for themselves. He has, 
too, the sombre^giftjof tragedy, as shown in 
L,as Paces de los Reyes, in La Estrella de 
Sevilla, in La Fianza satisfecha, where 
Leonido is a figure no less impressively 
terrible than the figure of Don Juan himself. 
Read him in Peribanez y el Comendador de 
Ocana, or in Fuente ovejuna, or in Los 
Comendador es de Cordoba, and you will have 



47 

revealed to you the full breadth and depth 
of his wondrous power. Read El Rey Don 
Pedro en Madrid^ a piece often ascribed to 
Claramonte, or to Tirso, or to Calderon, and 
you will realize the inexhaustible resources of 
the dramatist who can spare so much to 
make the reputation of others without any 
appreciable loss to himself. 

Consider a moment how poor would be 
the world's theatre were it deprived of 
Lope's capital. It was once the fashion to say 
that he dropped out of vogue the moment 
he died, and it is true that his place, was 
taken (though not filTe^J'IByXralderon. But 
his memory was perpetuated in other ways ; 
mostly by imitations. During his own life- 
time his wealth had been discovered by 
Sainte-Beuve's favourite, Rotrou, and it may 
be well to note here that a large propor- 
tion of Rotrou's plays are simple adapta- 
tions from Lope : La bague d'oubli is from 
La sortija del olvido^ Laure persecutee is from 
Laura perseguida^ Saint-Gene st is from Lo 
verdaderojingido, the Heureux naufrage is from 
LI Naufragio prodigioso. Never was a repu- 



48 

tation won more cheaply. And in Mo liere 
Lope found a far more ' eminent follower 
than Rotrou. Had Lope not written El 
mayor imposible and La discreta enamorada we 
should not have the Ecole des maris as we 
have it now ; had he not written El Acero 
de Madrid and La Nina boba we should not 
have the Ecole desfemmes as we have it now ; 
had he not written Los melindres de Belisa 
we should not have Les Femmes savantes as 
we have it now. Tartufe bespeaks a careful 
study of El Perro del hortelano ; and the 
Medecin malgre /«/ proves that Moliere found 
in El Acero de Madrid enough material to 
furnish him with a second play. Some- 
times the loan is made through a nimble 
inte rmediary. For example, in U Amour 
medecin^ Moliere doubtless believed that he 
was plundering Cyrano de Bergerac's Pedant 
youe ; he could scarcely know that the 
Pedant Joue was taken from Lope's Robo de 
Elena, It would be as idle as it would 
be easy to draw up a list of profitless loans 
by D'Ouville, Boisrobert, and others, but 
it is worth mentioning that, as Corneille's 



49 

Don Sanche d'Aragon derives from Lope's 
Palacio confuso^ so his admirable Suite du 
Menteur is based upon Lope's Amur sin 
saber a quien. Lastly, it should not be 
forgotten that The Toung Admiral oi Shirley, 
the last of the great English dramatists, 
and one rightly praised for the originality 
of his plots, is suggested by Lope's Don 
Lope de Car dona, ^ 

If Lope has left this mark_jon_foreign 
literatures, it may well be imagined how 
deep and wide is his influence at home. 
Velez de Guevara made a considerable repu- 
tation with L,os celos hasta las cielos : an 
excellent play indeed, but, as it happens, 
adapted from La desdichada Estefania of Lope. 
Few dramatists have a higher fame than 
Rojas Zorrilla, and few deserve it more com- 
pletely. Still, it is plain that his master- 
piece Del Rey abajo ninguno owes much to 
Lope's Peribanez y el Comendador de Ocana 
and to Lope's Villano en su rincon. Take a 
writer like Moreto, famous all the world 
over for his wit and grace. That Moreto's 
dexterity as an adaptor was recognised in 



so 

his own generation is manifest from Jeronimo 
de Cancer's well-known epigram : — - 
Que estoy minando imagina 
Cuando tu de mi te quejas ; 
Que en estas comedias viejas 
He hallado una brava mina. 
But now-a-days perhaps few realize that 
Moreto lives, in great part, on the crumbs 
from Lope's table. His Como se vengan los 
nobles is taken from Lope's Testimonio vengado^ 
his Principe perseguido from Lope's Gran 
Duque de Moscovia^ his Eneas de Dios from 
Lope's C aba Hero del Sacramento^ his No puede 
ser from Lope's £/ Mayor imposible^ his 
Adultera penitente from Lope's Prodigio de 
Etiopia^ his Travesuras del estudiante Pantoja 
from Lope's Entr ernes del letrado^ his El mejor 
Par de los doce from Lope's Las Pobrezas 
de Rinaldos^ and his Z)e fuera vendrd quien 
de casa nos echard from Lope's De cuando 
acd nos vino, . . . The list is striking ; 
but it leaves Moreto in un disturbed ^posses- 
sion of that fine achievement in com edy_^jE/ 
desden con el desden. It would be odious to 
attempt to deprive Moreto of a brilliant 



^/ 



51 

play which, perhaps more than any other, 
testifies to the suppleness of his talent. Yet, 
in the interest of historical truth, it may be 
well to recall what SchaefFer has already 
pointed out : * namely, that £/ desden con el 
desden is a most masterly pastiche. The 
heroine, who hates men from what she has 
read of them, is taken from Lope's La Ven- 
gadora de las mujeres ; the devices of the 
suitors come from Lope's T>e cosario a cosario ; 
the stratagem of the successful lover occurs 
in Lope's play. La hermosa fea ; and the 
servant is simply transferred from Lope's 
Milagros del desprecio. It is difficult to 
conceive how Moreto's flattery of Lope 
could have taken a sincerer form. 

There remains in the Spanish drama one 
great figure, a superb poet who has often 
been set up as a rival to Lope de Vega. 
This is not, as one might expect, Tirso de 
Molina, whose claims are considerable as the 
author of El Burlador de Sevilla y Convidado 
de piedra, of that grand historical drama La 

* See Adolf Schaefifer's Geschichtc des spanischen National- 
dramas (Leipzig, 1890), vol. ii., pp. 158-159. 



Nl 



52 

Prudencia en la mujer^ of that moving and 
terrible play £/ Condenado pordesconjiado^ and 
a dozen more examples of conspicuous genius. 
It is Calderon, the youth whom Lope first 
introduced to public life. As no writer has 
had stauncher admirers than Calderon, so none 
has had greater reason to deplore the indis- 
cretion of his friends. It is difficult for us to 
imagine Frederic von Schlegel declaring 
that " in this great and divine master the 
enigma of life is not merely expressed but 
solved;'' or August von Schlegel laying it 
down that " Calderon is not merely the first 
of Spanish dramatists, but so much above all 
others that, far from speaking of a rival, there 
is none fit to be ranked as second to him.'* 
Since the Schlegels' day we have travelled 
far, but the immediate effect of these dithy- 
rambics was considerable. Goethe himself 
had been betrayed into praising Calderon's 
Hija del aire^ which Sr. Menendez y Pelayo 
very rightly describes as " a dramatic mon- 
strosity." But, after the first moment of 
rapture, the critical instinct reasserted itself 
in Goethe, and led him to note the infinite 



53 

mischief wrought by this blind worship of 
the Spanish poet, whose characters, as he 
observes, are as much alike as cannon balls 
or leaden soldiers, all cast in the same 
mould. It is true that Goethe was not 
deeply read in Calderon, but he had at least 
as ample a knowledge of Calderon's plays as 
the Schlegels had of Lope's : and, foreigner 
as he was, his keen perception caused him 
to lay his finger on Calderon's weakness 
precisely as the acute Luzan had done more 
than half a century earlier. It would be ^ 
uncritica l to deny that Calderon was — not only 
a splendid lyric poet, but — a most accom- 
pli shed^nasFeT^'oT'"''"'^^ 



dramatic device. Still, between this mar- 
vellous cleverness and the creation of character 
— which, after all, is the dramatist's chief 
concern — there is a wide interval. Even in 
England, where Calderon has found trans- 
lators of genius in Shelley and FitzGerald, 
the word of warning was uttered by the 
right man in the right place. No foreigner 
has ever had a more exact and informed 
knowledge of the Spanish drama than was 



54 

possessed by John Rutter Chorley, whose 
admirable articles are a final statement of the 
real position. Writing nearly half a century 
ago in The Athenceum^^ Chorley pointed out 
that, as regards the Spanish drama, Calderon 
'' found it already developed, and arrived in 
many directions at a point of excellence 
which he might equal, but could not hope 
to excel." In other words, Calderon came 
into the field too late : he cou|d only pro- 
ceed upon the lines laid down by Lope, and 

X produce variants of Lope*s work. 

Calderon was fortunate in the circum- 
stances of his life. His reputation was 
greatly promoted by the accident of his 
official rank, and by the fact that a pious 
editor (an imitator of Lope) collected the 
works of the fashionable court-dramatist. 

^ But it is beyond doubt that Calderon's pro- 
fessional connection with Philip IV., his com- 
placence in supplying pieces which were 
mere excuses for splendid spectacles, and 
his own natural ^tendencjr to allegories 

* No. 1 361, November 26, 1853. 



55 

which were occasions for illustrative treat- 
ment, all combined to degrade the Spanish 
theatre. It wariJisasffbus for "hif^^ his 

worst pieces were those most favoured by 
his kingly patron : that his Principe constante 
passed almost unnoticed in high places, 
while he was decorated with the Order 
of Santiago for hos tres mayores prodigios^ 
a feeble masque borrowed from Lope's 
Laberinto de Creta and ruined in the 
conveyance. It is characteristic of Lope"^ 
that he should have opposed the spectacular 
drama from the outset. " Four trestles, four 
boards, two actors, a passion :" and he under- 
took to supply the rest. It is equally 
characteristic of Lope that, though he him- 
self gave the sword-and-cloak play its final 
form, he is less constantly inclined tp^^ractise 
it than is Calderon : possibly because in this 
genre character counts for less than episode 
and incident. In a very different province 
of the drama, as a writer of autos^ Calderon^s 
superiority to Lope isTnconfesTable ; and yet ' 
even Cald^erorTTriight not disdain to sign 
El Auto de los cantares^ La Siega^ and Del 



56 

pan y del palo. Still, it must be frankly 
admitted that Lope'i. ./^^j^/c^j- , are not distin- 
guished by the exquisite combination of 
mysticism, philosophic subtlety and allegory, 
in which the younger man is supreme. 
But as Calderon overtops Lope as a meta- 
physical and allegorical poet, so he falls short 
of Lope's success in the religious drama on a 

\ Z^^^^£L^£^^* Where in Calderon shall we 
find aught to set against Lope's Fi anza 
satisfecha ? As for invention, no other great 
poet borrows so extravagantly as Calderon : 

\ plots, lines, stanzas, acts entire. Many will 
remember that he introduces Escriba's cele- 
brated verses — Ven^ muerte^ tan escondida — in 
Manos b lane as no ofenden^ and again in £/ 
mayor monstruo los eelos. It is less generally 
known thai the magnificent ballad — / Ay 
verdades ! que en amor — which adorns 
Calderon's Conde Lucanor^ is from Lope's 
pen. But I shall not enter on the endless 
task of indicating all Calderon's debts to 
Lope ; if I mention a few of his debts to 
another great dramatist it will suffice to 
disprove Schlegel's assertion that Calderon 



was far too rich to borrow. Too rich to 
borrow ! What are the facts ? That 
Calderon's A secreto agravio secreta ven- 
ganza derives from Tirso's Celoso prudente^ 
that his jE/ secreto a voces is from Tirso's 
Amar por arte mayor ^ that his Encanto 
sin encanto is from Tirso's Amar por senas^ 
and that the second act of Los cabellos de 
Absalon is copied almost word for word from 
Tirso's Venganza de Tamar,* No doubt 
the notions of literary morality current in 
the seventeenth century were looser than 
those of to-day, and at any period such 
borrowings are justified, or at least excused, 
by success. But Calderon's success is inter- 
mittent. The autos are essentially un- 
dramatic ; and, if we set aside as~exceptions, 
El Alcalde de Zalamea (in which Lope 
counts for much) and No siempre lo peor es 
cierto, it will be found that Calderon is seldom > 
capable of maintaining the interest through- ( 



* It is curious to observe that Tirso's Venganza de Tamar was 
reproduced in an abbreviated form, and with unimportant 
additions, under the name of Felipe Godinez. The fact is recorded 
in a Notice prefixed to the translations published by M. L^o 
Rouanet, Dt antes religieux de Calderon (Paris, 1898), p. 15. 



58 



I out^a whole play. Incomparably brilliant in 
individual scenes^ he is condemned to frequent 
failures, inasmuch as he follows what is on the 
point of becoming a petrified formula. His 
wonderful ingenuity, his technical accom- 
p'^ishment, his mellifluous eloquence, cannot 
, je overpraised ; but they do not vitalize 
to half th e purpo se of JLope*s instantaneous 
vision, his faculty of dramatic creation, his 
wide human sympathies, his debonair, 
fant astic humour . In Calderon we have the 
great court-poet, portraying with phrases of 
suave preciosity the conventional emotions 
of a single social class ; in Lope we have 
the great popular poet expressing deeper, 
more elemental passions, in vigorous forms 

\of his own design. 
^With Calderon the history of the Spanish 
drama may close. His long life covered the 
period of its brightest splendour and the first 
stages of its decline. He found it golden and 
left it silver. But fortune was always constant 
to him. Lope de Vega and the dramatists 
of his generation were to be read mostly in 
rare and wretched editions. The lucky 



59 

court-poet was accessible in purer texts which 
found, as they deserved to find, numerous 
admirers. Late in the eighteenth century, 
when the French fashion was at its height, 
when the destructive criticism of Luzan and 
Moratin had completed the ruin of the old 
national theatre, when Lessing himself was 
mistaking Montiano y Luyando for an 
important figure — even then some few plays^ 
by Calderon survived the wreck. Moreto,. 
too, was represented on the Madrid stage. 
Though Lope and Tirso were surely not 
forgotten by all their "countryrnen, they had 
fallen out of popular favour. "^gP Lope's 
name still echoed in foreign countries. We 
know that Metastasio admired him, that 
Lessing was astounded at his variety, his 
amalgam of the tragic and comic, his inde- 
pendence of the schools. And in Spain 
itself the revival of Lope's popularity began 
through the humble efforts of Candido Maria 
Trigueros, a most indifferent writer who, 
after failing as an original dramatist, suc- 
ceeded with his arrangements of LopeV 
Moza de cdntaro and E/ Anzuelo de Fenisdy, 



6o 



and at last produced an excellent play by 
recasting Lope's Estrella de Sevilla as Sancho 
Ortiz de las Roelas, It was unnecessary for 
Trigueros to have introduced passages which 
make Lope appear even more monarchical 
than he really was ; still, this was a less 
grave fault than that committed by Dionisio 
Soils, who actually undertook to convert 
Lope, the born romantique^ into a classic of 
the strict French school. 

Yet the very substitution of Solis's Nina 
boba for Lope's Dama boba was to the good 
inasmuch as it served to awaken interest in 

• the original. Thenceforward men like 
Duran, Lord Holland, George Henry Lewes, 
John Rutter Chorley, Grillparzer have, in 
varying degrees, contributed to re-establish 

v^ Lope in his ancient sovereignty. From the 
middle of the nineteenth century Lope's 
star has waxed as Calderon's has waned. 
The publication of la Barrera's biography has 
quickened general interest in the personality 
of the great enchanter. Many points in the 
romantic story of Lope's career are still 
obscure, and upon these it is safe to say that 



6i 



much light will be thrown in the elaborate 
biographical study which we may shortly 
expect from the well - known Spanish 
scholar, Professor Hugo Albert Rennert, ^-^C 
of the University of Pennsylvania. The 
monumental edition of Lope's complete 
works, now being issued by the Spanish 
Academy, under the direction of Sr. D. ^ 
Marcelino Menendez y Pelayo, the chief and 
master of all Spanish students, indicates a 
complete revolution in opinion and taste. 
And there are other symptoms no less signi- 
ficant. In France an eminent expert like 
M. Morel-Fatio spends a wealth of learning 
on an edition of the Arte nuevo de hacer 
comedias en este tiempo. In Italy Lope's plays 
and fugitive pieces are illustrated by the 
commentaries of scholars like Restori and 
Mele. In Austria and Germany the illumin- 
ating erudition of investigators like Farinelli, 
Hennigs, Gunthner, Albert Ludwig, and 
Wurzbach supplies us with critical mono- 
graphs and appreciations of inestimable value. 
There is even some slight danger that, in the 
future. Lope may be unduly over-praised 



62 



as he was unduly belittled in the eighteenth 
century. But no such peril threatens in 
England. It is discouraging to note that, 
in the long list of recent publications con- 
cerning Lope, our contribution is next to 
nothing. Indifference to so imposing a 
representative of a rich and varied literature 
/ is assuredly no matter for pride. The one 
\ remedy for those who do not appreciate 
Lope is to read him. To attack the huge 
library of dramatic literature which he has 
bequeathed us is an enterprise calling for 
courageous perseverance during years. The 
result will repay the effort. If, on the one 
hand, the man who reads with care all Lope's 
surviving plays is inevitably condemned to 
read little else, on the other hand, such a 
reader has before him the certainty of being 
interested, moved, and delighted for no 
small part of a life-time. He will learn to 

know a genius^ unequal indeed^ but never 

dull ; h e may be exha usted by Lope's inde- 
fatigable cleverness, but he will never weary 
of his author's company. He will see pass 
before him the entrancing pageant of a van- 



63 

ished age, a society vivid, picturesque, noble, ' f 
blazoning Its belief i n Go d, the King, the I 
Point of Honour, as imperious realities 
governing the conduct of an entire nation ; j \y^ 
he will meet with person^ ^ges of all gra des, 
presented in every circumstance from the 
most tragic to the most laughable, and he 
will make acquaintance with a score of 
heroines as fair and gracious as Rosalind or 
Beatrice. I invite you to make the trial/ 
And I confidently anticipate that here, as 
in other countries, the verdict of all who 
have thus qualified themselves to pronounce 
judgment will be unanimous. It will surely 
declare that literary history reveals no more'' 
interesting personality than Lope de Vega : 
that this great poet was also the mighty 
inventor of an original form, that he was 
a consummate expert in dramatic creation, 
with no equal in his own country, and — save 
Shakespeare only — no superior elsewhere. '' 



• • • • 



Erratum.— p. 12, line 18, for "younger Argensola/* 
read "elder Argensola." 



X t: A^i. A. X VJ O Jui 



■J 



r, un: — - 
RETURN 
TO— ► 
LOAN PFl 



RETURN TO DESK FROM WHICH BORROWED 

LOAN DEPT. 

RENEWALS ONLY—TEL. NO. 642-3405 

This book is due on the last date stamped below, or 

on the date to which renewed. 

Renewed books are subject to immediate recall. 



'■^' D3g r>' 



CIRCULATION DEPARTMENT 

202 AAain Library 



LOAN PERIOD 1 
HOME USE 



ALL BOOKS MAY BE RECALLED AFTER 7 DAYS 

1 -month loans may be renewed by calling 642-3405 

6-month loans may be recharged by bringing books to Circulation 

Desk 

Renewals and recharges may be made 4 days prior to due date 

DUE AS STAMPED BELOW 



LI 



J^nV 221978 






REC.Cm.NOV 26 78 



































































UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA, BERKELEY 
FORM NO. DD6, 40m, 3/78 BERKELEY, CA 94720 



