WALES 

AND THE 

WARS OF THE ROSES 



CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

C. F. CLAY, Manager 

ILcinfcott: FETTER LANE, E.C. 

EBmburgfj: 100 PRINCES STREET 



§& 


u 
s 

i I 


§M 


m 


m 


m 


m& 


i & 


'0 



&tia Sorfe: G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS 

Bombaj) anU Calcutta: MACMILLAN AND Co., Ltd. 

Eoronta: J. M. DENT AND SONS, Ltd. 

THE MARUZEN-KABUSHIKI-KAISHk 



All rig/its reserved 



WALES 

AND THE 

WARS OF THE ROSES 



BY 

HOWELL T. EVANS, M.A. 

St John's College, Cambridge 



Cambridge : 

at the University Press 
1915 



£ 



V*. 



©amtrrtrge : 

PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 



PREFACE 

AS its title suggests, the present volume is an attempt to 
■**■ examine the struggle between Lancaster and York from 
the standpoint of Wales and the Marches. Contemporary 
chroniclers give us vague and fragmentary reports of what 
happened there, though supplementary sources of informa- 
tion enable us to piece together a fairly consecutive and 
intelligible story. 

From the first battle of St Albans to the accession of 
Edward IV the centre of gravity of the military situation 
was in the Marches : Ludlow was the chief seat of the duke 
of York, and the vast Mortimer estates in mid- Wales his 
favourite recruiting ground. It was here that he experienced 
his first serious reverse — at Ludford Bridge; it was here, 
too, that his son Edward, earl of March, won his way to 
the throne — at Mortimer's Cross. Further, Henry Tudor 
landed at Milford Haven, and with a predominantly Welsh 
army defeated Richard III at Bosworth. For these reasons 
alone unique interest attaches to Wales and the Marches in 
this thirty years' war; and it is to be hoped that the 
investigation will throw some light on much that has 
hitherto remained obscure. 



331684 



vi PREFACE 

I have ventured to use contemporary Welsh poets as 
authorities ; this has made it necessary to include a chapter 
on their value as historical evidence. It was thought 
necessary, also, to give some account of the state of things 
in Wales during the first half of the fifteenth century, and 
of the part played by Welshmen in the last phases of the 
Hundred Years' War with France. 

I am deeply indebted to Prof. J. E. Lloyd, M.A., of 
Bangor University, for revising the proofs and for much 
salutary criticism; and to Mr J. Alban Morris of Cardiff 
for placing at my disposal his transcript of the manuscript 
History of Wales, by Ellis Griffith, in the Mostyn Library. 
The index has been compiled mainly by Mr T. L. Horabin 
of the Board of Trade. 

H. T. E. 

January 10, 1915. 



CONTENTS 



CHAP. 

I. The Historical Value of Contemporary Welsh 
Literature ...... 

II. The Penal Laws ..... 

III. Wales and the French Wars— Mathew Gough 

IV. Herbert and Tudor ..... 

V. The Campaign of Ludford .... 

VI. Mortimer's Cross ..... 

VII. The War in Wales ..... 

VIII. Warwick and Herbert — Banbury 

IX. The Return of Jasper Tudor — The Council of 

the Prince of Wales .... 

X. Henry Earl of Richmond, and the March to 

Bosworth ...... 

List of original Authorities 



page 

i 
16 

43 

66 

89 

114 

134 

157 

188 

202 
231 



GENEALOGICAL TABLES 
The Vaughans of Bredwardine 
The Tudors and Pulestons 
Pedigree of David ap Einon 
The Herberts 
The Mansels 

Family of Griffith ap Nicholas 
The Dwnns . 



113 
139 
J 45 
228 
229 
229 
230 



MAPS 
Battle of Mortimer's Cross 
Battle of Banbury 
Wales and the Marches 



To face page 126 

„ „ 180 

. at end 



CHAPTER I 

THE HISTORICAL VALUE OF CONTEMPORARY 
WELSH LITERATURE 

In the course of the present narrative, an endeavour will 
be made to show that Wales and the border counties exercised 
a more formidable and decisive influence than is generally 
believed, upon the course of the struggle between Lancaster 
and York. The history of the period has been thickly 
overgrown with the moss of tradition, romance, and myth, 
most of which accumulated during the sixteenth and seven- 
teenth centuries. A great deal of the fiction was clearly 
invented to inflate family pride ; some was due to a literal 
interpretation of purely rhetorical passages in the panegyrics 
of the poets. It is needless to say that such material, 
except what can be shown to have a foundation of truth, 
or at least of strong probability, is worthless as historical 
evidence. Yet, it has held sway for many centuries, and 
has given rise to considerable confusion. It will be essential 
to our purpose to rely exclusively upon original documents 
and contemporary sources of information. Amongst these 
will be included certain Welsh records which have been 
hitherto, and are still to a large extent, unexplored fields 
of historical research. The greater part of this material is 
in manuscript, scattered broadcast in public and private 
libraries. Some of it is already in print, but in many 
different publications, and consequently most inaccessible 
to the average student. 

In so far as events were recorded at all in Wales during 
the second half of the fifteenth century, that function was 

E. w. R. I 



2 THE HISTORICAL VALUE OF [ch. 

performed by the poets. Their chief interest, admittedly, 
is literary and linguistic. Nevertheless, the student of 
history may reasonably inquire what may be 
their title to credence, what reliance can be 
placed upon them, and with what abatements their 
presentation of persons and events should be accepted as 
truth. 

Let it at once be granted that these men did not profess 
Their to write down facts, dry and ungarnished. 

limitations. History would have gained much, and literature 
lost little, if the bards, instead of writing historical poems, 
had recorded their information in the form of annals or 
chronicles. But they were primarily poets, not chroniclers. 
As poets, they necessarily employ the artifices of their craft. 
They exaggerate ; they invent ; they draw upon their 
armoury of rhetoric. They colour, and frequently distort, 
facts to suit the exigencies of the occasion, and in the interests 
of those whose patronage they solicited. Their information 
is often garbled. 

Further, those portions of their writings which have any 
value for the historian are not poems descriptive of events 
and actions. They are odes and elegies for the glorification 
of individuals, and only incidentally admit descriptive 
narrative. The fabrications of rhetoric, therefore, are not 
absent. There is little minuteness of detail ; rarely any 
chronology or geography. Genealogies are plentiful, but of 
family rather than of general interest. There is an amplitude 
of vague, hazy allusions, which were doubtless perfectly 
intelligible to that generation ; to us they are shades of 
a vanished past. 

Lastly, they are prejudiced, especially against the Saxon. 
Many of their poems were written under the sting of humilia- 
tion, when the wounds of defeat were still open and sore. 
Invective not infrequently descends to vilification. In this 
respect the poetry of the period cannot be paralleled at any 
epoch in the history of the literature of Wales. 



i] CONTEMPORARY WELSH LITERATURE 3 

This feature in the poets, however, has its value for the 
National historian ; for it reveals the deep chasm which 

prejudices. separated the two nations. Its most outspoken 
exponent was Lewis Glyn Cothi, who could rarely hide 
his invincible repugnance to the name of Saxon. It detracts 
considerably from the historical value of his testimony that 
he was himself a victim of persecution at the hands of 
English residents in Wales. He tells us that, having made 
preparations for taking up his abode in Chester, he was 
unceremoniously expelled from the city, and his belongings 
looted by the inhabitants. His fiercest attacks were delivered 
when his feelings were thus embittered by personal affront, 
or by such a national disaster as that at Edgecote. The 
same applies, though in a lesser degree, to the lambent 
sarcasm of Guto'r Glyn. He had occasion to journey 
through many parts of England, visiting among other places 
Warwick, Stafford and Coventry. When he reached the 
north of England, he experienced a very hostile disposition 
towards his language and country. However, his weapons 
are not poisoned, though his threats are generally well- 
directed. 

These two are not the only poets that bear witness to 
the estrangement between the nations. Ieuan Deulwyn, 
smarting beneath the exclusion of his countrymen from civil 
rights, implores Sir Richard Herbert " to lock the door of 
privilege against the Saxon." 

Chwi a ellwch a'ch allwydd 
Roi clo ar sais rhag cael swydd. 

Dafydd Llwyd appeals to Jasper Tudor to bring to an end 

the days of official intolerance, and warns his countrymen 

against " putting their faith in the signet of the Saxon." 

But we are not surprised to find such bitterness in the poet 

when we know that he was the friend of Griffith Vaughan, 

who was brutally murdered by Lord Grey of Powys, in 1447. 

Some of Tudur Penllyn's lines are equally acrid, and were 

also largely the outcome of personal injury. The poets' 

1 — 2 



4 THE HISTORICAL VALUE OF [ch. 

invective was thus sharpened on a whetstone of disappoint- 
ment, injustice, oppression, and cruelty ; their anger burned 
fiercely ; yet the dregs of passion are of little value, for 
serious history cannot be built on diatribes. 

Whatever pretensions to historical verity these poets may 
The poets- title have must rest mainly on their close acquaint- 
to credence. anceship with some of the chief politicians of 
the day. This enabled them to obtain information at first- 
hand from the actors themselves. This is the most that can 
be said on behalf of chroniclers in general, few of whom 
were actual eye-witnesses of the events they describe. 
The majority can claim no more than that they were con- 
temporary. The Welsh poet, on the other hand, was a 
welcome guest at the homes of the gentry, whom he visited 
at regular intervals. 

Lewis Glyn Cothi's home was situated in the valley of 
the Cothi, in Carmarthenshire. Close by lay Newton, the 
home of his patron, Griffith ap Nicholas, who dominated 
West Wales in the middle of the century. He was intimate 
with the Herberts of Raglan, and with the Vaughans of 
Bredwardine and Tretower. At times we catch glimpses of 
him in Chester, Flint, Anglesey. His list of patrons, in fact, 
includes every contemporary Welshman of note. Ieuan 
Deulwyn, another Carmarthenshire poet, was a native of 
Kidwelly. He also dedicated several odes to the Herberts. 
Guto'r Glyn came from the neighbourhood of Llangollen, 
in the valley of the Dee. He was as ubiquitous as Lewis 
Glyn Cothi, and not less in demand as a household bard. 
Dafydd Llwyd and Tudur Penllyn lived in Merionethshire, 
on terms of friendship with the garrison at Harlech. There 
are strong grounds for the belief that Robin Ddu, the 
swarthy bard of Anglesey, met Owen Tudor when the latter 
withdrew to Wales after his escape from Newgate. 

It is to be observed, moreover, that the poets may have 
obtained access to the chief English politicians. Humphrey, 
duke of Gloucester, as earl of Pembroke, and for many years 



I] CONTEMPORARY WELSH LITERATURE 5 

chief justice either of North Wales or of the South, had 
occasion to pay several visits to the country. He was an 
ardent patron of letters. But though there appears to be 
no evidence in his voluminous correspondence with men of 
letters that he ever came into close touch with Welsh literary 
circles, Lewis Glyn Cothi alludes to him in terms of sympathy 
and admiration. The early promotion of Reginald Pecock, 
apparently a native of West Wales, was due to the influence 
and patronage of Humphrey. Griffith ap Nicholas, the 
patron and neighbour of Lewis Glyn Cothi, together with 
a large number of other Welshmen, was in the duke's 
retinue when he appeared at the parliament of Bury, in 

1447- 

In their writings these poets show abundant traces that 
they were alive to the march of events. It was 

Their J ..... . r 

sources of an essential part of their business to get infor- 

mation, and turn it to account. It is impossible 
to avoid the conviction that Lewis Glyn Cothi derived the 
raw material for his vivid description of the battle of 
Edgecote directly from some of the Herberts or the 
Vaughans, or their associates in that murderous fight. In 
his ode to Thomas ap Roger, who was among the slain, 
it is not difficult to discern what is intrinsically improbable, 
or what is palpably the product of the poet's imagination. 
When the poet asserts that the greatest carnage on that day 
took place under his hero's standard, we are inclined to 
ascribe it to a natural anxiety to magnify and applaud. 
Even the professed historian cannot always avoid the 
artifices of eloquence ; and fifteenth century chroniclers 
are rarely impartial. But in this ode there are undoubted 
germs of truth. A basis of fact underlies the amplifications 
and excesses of rhetoric. The statements that part of the 
Welsh army cut its way through the ranks of the northerners, 
that Thomas ap Roger fought against desperate odds with 
a broken lance, that the combatants amidst the clash and 
clangour of battle shouted, some for Edward, others for king 



6 THE HISTORICAL VALUE OF [ch. 

Harry, some for Herbert, others for Warwick, have a note 
of probability and truth. Facts are hard to hide ; fabrica- 
tion is not always easy. It is not strange, therefore, that 
the above description is in many ways substantiated by Hall, 
the Tudor chronicler. Guto'r Glyn's realistic version of the 
campaign against Harlech castle by the Herberts in 1468 is 
also a valuable piece of historical evidence which it would 
be fastidious to ignore. Briefly, and divested of its trappings, 
it amounts to this. One division of the attacking army 
advanced along the coast of North Wales, leaving a trail 
of devastation and ruin ; another advanced from the south ; 
Harlech offered but a feeble resistance — " By a Herbert it 
could be obtained for the asking " ; and the army numbered 
about nine thousand, an estimate which, as we shall 
see, is corroborated by Hall, and roughly by the Issue 
Rolls. 

It has always been assumed that William Herbert, earl 
of Pembroke, was a steady Yorkist. Lewis Glyn Cothi 
implies the contrary, and further research has proved con- 
clusively that he was correct. The editor of the only edition 
of the poet failed to appreciate this fact, and consequently 
became enmeshed in a tangle of contradictions. The same 
poet observes that the sons of Griffith ap Nicholas were on 
the side of Lancaster, and William of Worcester agrees with 
him. We must therefore dismiss as worthless the idle story 
of the family biographer in the Cambrian Register, though 
that document has been credited by so distinguished an 
authority as James Gairdiner, and has been the favourite 
resort of generations of less responsible writers. 

One important function of the fifteenth century Welsh 
poet should not be overlooked. He was an 

The poets r . 

as national instrument in the hands of the leader of the 
moment to advertise prospective political move- 
ments, sometimes openly, at other times in enigma. 

Prophecies there are in plenty, the pardonable efferves- 
cence of a seething nationalism. But it would be a 



i] CONTEMPORARY WELSH LITERATURE 7 

mistake to regard these futurist proclamations as the 
forecasts of partisans, destitute of foundation, and un- 
warranted in fact. In one of his poems Lewis Glyn Cothi, 
apprehensive for the cause of Margaret and her son Edward, 
alludes to Jasper Tudor's search for assistance in France 
and Brittany, his forthcoming return to Wales by sea, and 
his probable landing at Milford Haven about the Feast of 
St John. No date is given ; but the facts coincide with the 
movements of Jasper Tudor during the few months which 
immediately preceded the battle of Mortimer's Cross. For 
Prophecy ' Jasper actually obtained help abroad ; he came 
and fact. ^y sea . ^he footle took place in the first week 

in February. Now the Feast of St John the Evangelist 
would be December 27, and the few intervening weeks would 
enable Jasper to gather his forces and reach Mortimer's Cross, 
in Herefordshire, by February. 

Similarly, there are copious references to the prospective 
invasion of Henry of Richmond in 1485, which we cannot 
entirely ignore as vague and unreliable prophecy. It is a 
curious coincidence that the cherished belief of the medieval 
Welsh sage, that a Welshman would one day ascend the 
throne of Britain, found its fulfilment in the person of 
Henry Tudor. 

It has been said — and this is the prevailing modern view — 
_. . , that " during the civil war there was but one 

The title ° 

'Wars of rose, the white rose of York, there was no 

Lancastrian rose : the red rose of the House of 
Tudor first appeared on Bosworth Field." This may be true 
of England ; it is not true of Wales. The red rose of the 
Tudors had appeared in Wales long before it blossomed in 
splendour on Bosworth field. From the very beginning of 
the war the Tudors made Wales their special sphere of action. 
Edmund, earl of Richmond, came here early in 1456, and 
made Pembroke and Tenby his headquarters. On his death 
the same year, his place was taken by his brother Jasper, 
earl of Pembroke. From then till 1485 the history of the 



8 THE HISTORICAL VALUE OF [ch. 

war in Wales is largely a record of the movements and the 
schemes, the failures and the successes of Jasper. 

It is not surprising, therefore, that contemporary Welsh 
literature should contain frequent allusions to the family 
device. One or two instances shall suffice. In an ode to 
Owen Tudor, written soon after the battle of Mortimer's 
Cross, Robin Ddu, the Anglesey poet, while bewailing his 
hero's death, transfers his hopes to Jasper, and prophesies 
" the victory of the red dragon over the dishonoured white." 

Draig wen ddibarch yn gwarchae 
A draig goch a dyr y cae. 

Although in this couplet the play between " red " and 
" white " is unmistakable, the " dragon " as a substitute 
for " rose " may not seem convincing. However, the same 
poet in a poem written during the exile of the Tudors, looks 
forward hopefully to the time when " red roses will rule in 
splendour " : 

Rhos cochion mewn rhwysg uchel. 

Guto'r Glyn, in an ode to Roger Kynaston, composed shortly 
after the return of Edward IV, plays upon the conflict 
between a " rose of silver " and " a rose of gold." The rose 
is also a favourite emblem with Dafydd Llwyd, a warm 
associate of Jasper. The white rose of York, too, had 
its adherents. Lewis Glyn Cothi, exultant in praise of 
Sir William Herbert's prowess in the north of England, 
describes how " he triumphed with white roses " : 

A oresgynodd a'i ros gwynion. 
But as the white rose is acknowledged to have been a device 
of the Yorkists, it is unnecessary to enlarge on this point. 
The poets, moreover, were not ill-informed on events 
The French m F ranc e, in which hosts of Welshmen took an 
wars - active share ; but their information is largely of 

local interest only. How they obtained their knowledge 
is not altogether a matter of conjecture. A constant 
stream of warriors passed to and fro between the two 
countries. Scores of French prisoners were at various 



I] CONTEMPORARY WELSH LITERATURE 9 

times lodged in the royal castles of North Wales. On the 
conclusion of the war, although a few like John Edward, 
who had married a French wife, became subjects of the king 
of France, the majority returned to their native land with 
tales of plunder and adventure. 

Guto'r Glyn voices the consternation with which the 
news of Mathew Gough's capture was received in Wales, and 
urges the collection of a ransom to redeem him. Lewis Glyn 
Cothi hints at the same warrior's exploit at the battle of 
Formigny in 1450, when, at the head of his men, he cut his 
way through the French lines to safety ; and we see no 
reason to reject the same writer's statement that Gough's 
life on that occasion was saved by Gwilym Gwent. His 
death on London Bridge, while endeavouring to save the 
city from Cade's rebels, sent the nation into mourning, a fact 
which is curiously corroborated by William of Worcester in 
a quaint Latin couplet 1 . 

The Anglesey poet already referred to appears to be our 
earliest authority for the romance of Owen Tudor and 
Catherine, the widowed queen of Henry V. Robin Ddu 
was in close touch with the Tudors and the chief families 
of North Wales. It is possible, probable even, that he got 
his information from Owen Tudor himself. The version in 
Stowe, which is the one generally accepted, is substantially 
the same, but of a later date. 

Enough has now been said to show at least that these 

writers cannot altogether be ignored by the 

Indt P h° e ets student of the history of the latter half of the 

dynastic fifteenth century. But after all, the supreme 

wars. J 

importance of the poets lies in another direction. 
It is not theirs to record facts. It is theirs to give expression 
to the debates and the promptings of the nation's soul. And 
if we are to seek in them an accurate interpretation of popular 
feeling, the dynastic question as such had no meaning in 
Wales. Not one of them holds a brief to buttress either 

1 See p. 62. 



io THE HISTORICAL VALUE OF [ch. 

Lancaster or York. They sing the glory of a Tudor or a 
Herbert according as each rises to eminence, and bids fair 
to become a national leader. Nor can it be said that they 
exposed themselves to a charge of apostacy if their panegyrics 
thus alternated between the one and the other. They were 
consistent in their nationalism. To them Herbert and Tudor 
were nationalists, not party leaders. Lewis Glyn Cothi saw 
in Edward IV a descendant of Gwladys the Dark, daughter 
of Llywelyn the Great ; and he appeals to him, " a royal 
Welshman," to rid them of oppression, and ameliorate the 
condition of the peasant. Similarly, Henry of Richmond 
found in Wales enthusiastic support not because he repre- 
sented the claims of Lancaster, but because he was the 
grandson of Owen Tudor. 

No leader of dazzling pre-eminence had arisen in Wales 
since Owen Glyndwr. " Those who are awake know that 
Wales has long since fallen into a deep sleep, and awaits 
an embraving champion." 

Cysgu 'roedd Cymru medd sawl a'i gwyl 
Yn hir heb flaenawr fau ragorawl. 

These are the words of Lewis Glyn Cothi who knew the 
Their nation's pulse better than any of his contem- 

nationaiism. poraries. The wars of Owen Glyndwr had left 
the country bruised, and shackled by an oppressive penal 
code. The people were restive, and in the second half of 
the century became animated by a profound, sustained 
passion to rid themselves of the incubus of alien officials. 
They were no longer inspired by false hopes of an independent 
nationality. That ideal had perished. Yet Wales a nation 
was as virile a principle as in the days of the last Llywelyn ; 
and to advocate it was the touchstone of true worth in her 
leaders. The poets tuned their harps to blazon the nation's 
name, and to proclaim the chieftain best fitted to deliver 
them from bondage. 

The first of such men was Griffith ap Nicholas. He 
died about the time that Jasper Tudor came to Wales. In 



I] CONTEMPORARY WELSH LITERATURE n 

Jasper the poet saw two important qualifications for 
leadership : he was related by birth to the reigning sovereign, 
Henry VI ; and he was the son of Owen Tudor. Accordingly, 
all were urged to unite beneath his standard. Not in vain ; 
a fact which is forcibly exemplified by the campaign of 
Ludford. When Jasper's cause waned, the mantle of 
leadership was transferred to William Herbert, whose star 
rose rapidly above the horizon after the battle of Mortimer's 
Cross. After the death of Herbert at Edgecote, in 1469, 
the poets centre their hopes once more in Jasper and his 
young nephew, Henry of Richmond. 

In some poems the prospective saviour of his country 
is designated " Owen the Deliverer." That this belief in 
" Owen " was not a delusion finds curious illustration in 
the Welsh Tudor chronicler, Ellis Griffith, whose History of 
Wales is still in manuscript only, in the library of Lord 
Mostyn. For the general history of the period under con- 
sideration this history must be consulted with caution. In 
many respects it is worthless. The following story, however, 
is interesting and suggestive. 

" William ap Griffith was a chieftain of North Wales. 
Deeply disappointed by the death of Edmund Tudor, earl 
of Richmond, before a son had been born to him, he threw 
his bard, Robin Ddu, into prison, exclaiming angrily : ' You 
made me believe that a scion of the House of Owen would 
one day restore us the crown of Britain. You now perceive 
that your prophecy was false, for Edmund has left no son 
to succeed him.' Soon it became known that the duchess 
was about to give birth to a child. Robin Ddu was immedi- 
ately set free and despatched to Pembroke. A son was born, 
and they called his name Owen, by which name young Henry 
Tudor was for many years known among the Welsh 1 ." 

On the social life of Wales at this period the poets are 
invaluable. They throw interesting light also on ecclesi- 

1 The above is a brief summary of the tale which is given in full, in the 
original text, in an appendix to this chapter. For an excursus on authori- 
ties, other than those of Wales, see Appendix at the end of the book. 



12 THE HISTORICAL VALUE OF [ch. 

astical affairs. Lewis Glyn Cothi is trenchant in his satire 
upon the friars and the travelling minstrels, though his 
lampoon is often less robust than that of Guto'r Glyn. The 
sale of indulgences, and even the papacy itself, come beneath 
their scourge. " The Church is as impotent as the Govern- 
ment," says Tudur Penllyn, " and armies have become 
the instrument of the devil." Dice, chess, carol-singing, 
cards, and dancing relieved the monotony of everyday life. 
The " Life of Sir Rhys ap Thomas " in the Cambrian 
-The Life Register (1795) is a work which has enjoyed 

of sir Rhys much popularity, and has formed the basis of 

ap Thomas." , r * , f , , , 

almost everything that has been written on 
Wales during the second half of the fifteenth century. 
The original manuscript appears to have been written in the 
early part of the seventeenth century by one who claimed 
some relationship to Rhys ap Thomas, in order, as he states, 
to dash in pieces some false, forged traditions respecting 
him. The writer traces the history of the family from the 
time of Griffith ap Nicholas, the grandfather of Rhys. 

The style is attractive, and characterised by unusual 
dramatic power. The writer was familiar with the chronicles 
of Hall and Holinshed ; in fact his account, when it deals 
with the general events of history, is largely a reproduction 
of Hall. He has also perused some of the fifteenth century 
Welsh poets, but not critically ; for he presumes that they 
give the literal truth and translates them accordingly. He 
states, for example, that Griffith ap Nicholas possessed seven 
strong castles, and that three great dukes with two other 
great judges of the realm attempted and failed " to crush 
and tread him under foot." These statements are a transla- 
tion of an ode to Griffith by Gwilym ap Ieuan Hen 1 . 

1 Gorchestion Beirdd Cymru, 142—4. 

Saith gastell sy i'th gostiaw, 
A saith lys y sy i'th law ; 
Tri dug a brofes trwy dwng 
A dau ustus dy ostwng; 
Nes iddynt na'th ddiswyddaw 
Dramwy ar draed dri raor draw. 



i] CONTEMPORARY WELSH LITERATURE 13 

The writer then proceeds to amplify. The three dukes 
were " Richard, duke of York, Humphrey, duke of Bucking- 
ham, and Henry, duke of Warwick, or rather Jasper, earl 
of Pembroke, to whom he had just cause of quarrel because 
Jasper took a liking to Griffith's castle of Cilgerran." It is 
no doubt true that these lords had large interests in Wales ; 
and further, that Griffith was actually engaged in strife with 
Jasper's brother, Edmund. But Jasper's relations with the 
family were friendly, and Griffith's sons fought with him 
against the Yorkists at Mortimer's Cross ; while it is certain 
that Cilgerran did not belong to Griffith ap Nicholas. 

Moreover, the account given here of the attitude of 
Griffith towards the rival houses of York and Lancaster is 
seriously at variance with that given by Lewis Glyn Cothi ; 
for it states that Griffith, having been found guilty of felony, 
offered his services to the duke of York, and fought and died 
at Mortimer's Cross. To this we shall return. There are 
many adventurous tales which we have no means of verifying, 
but they are of personal, rather than general interest. Some 
of them, indeed, bear a striking resemblance to those con- 
nected with other individuals at this period. Like Lord 
Stanley, Rhys ap Thomas is required by Richard III to give 
his son as a hostage ; while the story that Rhys, having 
promised Richard that whoever, ill-affected to the state, 
should dare to land in Wales where he (Rhys) had any 
employments under his majesty " he must resolve with 
himself to make his entrance and irruption over my bellie," 
and that, to verify his oath, he suffered Henry of Richmond, 
on landing at Dale, to pass over his body — this story also 
has its counterpart in the annals of Shrewsbury. The 
author asserts, further, that Rhys was absolute in the neigh 
bourhood of Milford Haven where Henry landed, that he 
kept Carmarthen castle, that Richard required him to safe- 
guard Milford Haven against foreign invasion, and that he 
joined Henry at Dale, all of which are either contradicted 
by known facts or unsubstantiated by independent evidence. 



14 THE HISTORICAL VALUE OF [ch. 

It would therefore be unsafe to take this work as a reliable 
guide. 

The recognised contemporary chroniclers have very little 
English to say of Wales. Their references are few and 

authorities. shadowy — the impressions of men who view 
things from afar. There is not a single continuous record. 
We have therefore to gather the sequence of events from 
a mass of material drawn from such official documents as 
the Rolls of Parliament, Rymer's Foedera, the Patent Rolls, 
Acts and Proceedings of the Privy Council, the Deputy 
Keeper's Reports, Inquisitiones post mortem, Statutes of the 
Realm, the Paston Letters and other correspondence, 
Municipal Records, and the original material to be found 
in the publications of various societies. Such material, 
though disconnected, is on the whole beyond suspicion, and 
it is possible to obtain from them a tolerably clear idea of 
the march of events 1 . 



APPENDIX 

Extract from the MS. " History of Wales," by Ellis 
Griffith, in the Mostyn Library. 

Genedigaeth Henri ap yr Edmwnt a dreith ym mlaen hyn o lafur. 
Yn y pryd a'r amser yr ydoedd brudiwr a bardd mawr o vewn tir 
Gwynedd y neb a elwid Rhobin Ddu brydydd...yr hwn ynn hyn 
o amser ynny blaen a ddywedasai i Syr William Gruffuth yr hwn 
yn y cyfamser aoedd ben Siambyrlen o Wynedd i dygai Rishmwn 
goron tyrnas lloygyr am iben or achos yngydrym ac ir marchog 
gafel y gwirionedd o varwolaeth Iarll Ritsmwnt y vo a ddanvones 
i gyrchu y bardd wrth yr hwn y dywed ef drwy ymravaelion eiriau 
gwattwarus yn y modd yma. Aha Hrobin deg. Wele mor deg 
i mae ych brudiau chwi ynn dyvod tydi a wnaethost i mi ac i lawer 
dyn goelio i dygai Ritshmwnt goron y dyrnas. Megis ac i dangosais 
di imi yn fynnych o amseroedd or blaen. Neithyr yrowan ir wyf 

1 For an account of the original authorities of the period the reader is 
referred to Historical Literature of the Fifteenth Century, Kingsford ; and 
Ramsay, Lancaster and York. 



i] CONTEMPORARY WELSH LITERATURE 15 

i ynn gweled yn amlwg nad oes onid ffuent a chelwydd oth ymddi- 
ddanau di. Or achos y dywed y prydydd drwy gythrudd a Hid ynn 
y modd hwn. Serre pette iarll Richmwnt gwedi marw ag wedi 
llosgi i gorff ef ac wedi boddi y lludw etto i mae i wraig ef yn feichiog 
ar ettivedd mab, yr hwn a fydd brenin o loygyr or achos yma, megis 
ac y mae'r chwedyl yn sathredig ymysg y Cymru, y vo a gedwis y 
Siambyrlen y bardd megys ynn garcharor oni gavas ef wir wybodaeth 
fod yr iarlles yn feichiog ac yna y vo a ollyngodd Robin yn hrydd 
yr hwn o fewn ychydig o amser ynnol a gymerth i shiwrnai o Wynedd 
i ddeheubarth. Ac ir oedd ef ynghastell Penvro pan oedd yr Iarlles 
yn travaelio oi chlevyd ac wrth i gynghor ef i kymerth hi y Siambyr 
o fewn y twr a dreithir uchod yn y lie y ganned iddi vab. Megis y 
mae gwyr hen o Gymru yn dywedud a hennwyd ynni vedyddio 
Ywain. Neithyr pan ir goshibion ddangos ir iarlles i henw ef y hi 
a beris ir esgob droi i henw ef ai hennwi ef Henry neithyr val kynt 
gwyr Cymru ai galwai ef Ywain yn vynnych no henri yr hwn wedi 
i ddyvod ef mewn oedran affoes allan or deyrnas i dir ffrainck rhag 
ofn brenin Edwart. 



CHAPTER II 

THE PENAL LAWS 

The rising of Owen Glyndwr in the first decade of the 
century was in some respects the greatest social calamity 
that the country ever experienced. The wide-spread ruin 
of monasteries, and the relentless devastation of lands, were 
the least among the evils which it brought in its train. In 
the first place, Wales was for many years afterwards regarded 
as an active volcano which might at any moment break 
out in violent eruption. 

Beware of Walys, Criste Jhesu mutt us kepe 

That it make not oure childeis childe to wepe, 

Ne us also, if it go his waye 

By unwarenesse ; seth that many a day 

Men have beferde of here rebellioun. 

Loke wele aboute, for, God wote, we have nede 1 . 

The English Government considered it necessary to 
Results of maintain a considerable force of archers and 

oi^ndwr's men-at-arms in the most disaffected districts, 
rising. Apart from the castle garrisons at Carnarvon, 

Harlech, Carmarthen and other royal strongholds, a force 
of about a thousand men was stationed in the very heart 
of the country, at Cymmer and Bala in Merionethshire, 
and at Strata Florida in Carmarthenshire. Even when 
England was being drained of its fighting men for the French 
wars of Henry V, Wales could not be left without a guard 

1 " The Libell of English Policye," circ. 1436, in Political Songs and 
Poems, 11. 190. Rolls edition. 



ch. n] THE PENAL LAWS 17 

of nearly a thousand men 1 . In the eyes of patriotic Welsh- 
men this military occupation served as a mark of abiding 
captivity and national subjection. 

Henry V, who had acquired an invaluable military 
training in Wales during his youth, was statesman enough 
to perceive that a disaffected Wales was a menace he could 
not afford to ignore, or treat with indifference. And so, 
being engrossed in plans of foreign conquest, he became 
anxious for a complete reconciliation. Owen Glyndwr 
himself was still, apparently, at large, and the possibility 
of a renewal of active hostilities not altogether remote. 
Thus, on the eve of the campaign of Agincourt in 1415, 
just before the army embarked from France, David Howel, 
a Welshman of note, was charged with complicity in the 
conspiracy of the earl of Cambridge. In his confession 
Cambridge stated that the earl of March, who was to replace 
Henry V on the throne, was to be taken to Wales, and there 
proclaimed king ; that the royal castles in Wales were to be 
seized ; and that David Howel was to engineer a rising in 
North Wales. David Howel's complicity in the affair could 
not be proved ; for, in the following year, he complained 
in parliament that he had been indicted of treason by one 
John Eliot before the king's justices, and that Eliot did not 
appear to support the charge 2 . 

Aware of the intractable temper of his Welsh enemies, 
the king sent repeated offers of pardon to Owen Glyndwr 
or his representative. A few weeks before his departure for 
France he sent Gilbert Talbot on a peaceful mission to Wales, 
with authority to pardon any rebels who might be disposed 
to submit. The following year Talbot went on a second 
embassy of a similar nature, armed with power to negotiate 

1 In 141 1 there were 300 men-at-arms, and 600 archers in these places. 
In 1415, Strata Florida had 40 men-at-arms, and 80 archers; Cymmer 
and Bala 300 men-at-arms and 60 archers each. Acts and Proceedings of 
the Privy Council, II. 14-18, 37-38, III. 146. 

2 Rymer's Foedera, ix. 300-1. Rot. Pari. 4 Henry V, 64-6, 102. 
Appendix to Nicholas, Agincourt, 19. David Howel was accused ' sans 
aucune manere de droit.' For his subsequent history see chap. III. 

E. W. R. 2 



18 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

with Owen's son Meredith, as Owen himself could not be 
found 1 . 

Moreover, it stands recorded that Henry gave instructions 
for the rebuilding of some of the monasteries that had been 
destroyed in the war. The abbey of Llanfaes in Anglesey 
was to be restored, and at least two of the monks were to 
be Welsh 2 . 

HI The rising of Owen Glyndwr, in the second place, left 
a bitter heritage of feud among the Welsh families them- 
selves. Many of them had been opposed to Owen's action 
from the beginning, and none more vehemently than David 
Gam, whose daughter Gwladys became the mother of the 
Herberts of Raglan. These loyalists were proscribed and 
ruthlessly persecuted by what may with propriety be called 
the patriots : their lands were devastated ; many were 
imprisoned ; not a few escaped vengeance by enlisting for 
the wars in France. For more than a generation frequent 
complaints were made to Parliament that those who had 
been loyal to the Government were the victims of ill-treat- 
ment by Owen's partisans and those of their blood 3 . Some, 
apparently, found refuge in the old Welsh custom of rhaith, 
according to which three hundred men were required to 
swear to the loyalty or innocence of the accused 4 . However, 
the feud between patriot and loyalist was fiercely active 
long after the accession of Henry VI 5 . 

But blood-feuds and the establishment of a species of 
martial law throughout the land were not the only or the 

1 Rymer, ix. 283, 330. July 5, 1415, and February 24, 1416. 

2 Rymer, ix. 147-8. July 3, 1414. 

3 Rot. Pari. (1413-14) 1 Henry V. 10. " Plusieurs des dits 
rebelles etaient encore en vie, et autres de sang prochain a ceux rebelles ou 
leurs amis font graunde pursuite envers les loiaux lieges, surmettant en eux. 
Us demandent haute amende. Les dits loiaux lieges sont grevousement 
vexes en plusieurs parties et seigneurs de Galles, aucuns de eux par endite- 
ments, acusements, ou empechements, et aucuns par menaces et distresses 
prises, et aucuns par leurs corps prises et emprisonnes." See also, ibid. 
1427, 329. 

4 Rot. Pari. 141 3, 10. See also the complaint of William ap William 
ap Griffith. Rot. Pari. 1439-42, 16. 

5 Ibid. 1427. 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 19 

least of the evil results of Glyndwr's rising. It produced 
a code of penal laws which increased in severity until the 
cataclysm of the Wars of the Roses swept away the old 
order of things, and ushered in a new era of coalition and 
prosperity. For many generations Welshmen were denied 
the ordinary privileges of citizenship : they could not acquire 
property in land within or near the boroughs ; they could 
not serve on juries ; intermarriage between them and the 
English was forbidden ; they could not hold office under the 
Crown ; no Englishman could be convicted on the oath of 
a Welshman 1 . 

These protective walls, which sought to guard the 
interests of English residents in Wales, could 

Welshmen 

who received not long withstand the assaults of social and 
political storms. The peasant fought for a 
path to freedom ; his lord hungered for more land ; 
the artisan was rising to a position of independence ; the 
merchant opened up new avenues of trade ; home and 
foreign wars created a demand for Welsh soldiers ; in the 
midst of all came a prolonged strife which finally shattered 
the filigree of social distinctions between the two nations. 
But while these forces were gathering strength the average 
Welshman was grievously handicapped by the penal laws. 
It would have been inexpedient, if not difficult, to withhold 
citizenship from a Welshman of commanding local influence, 
whose power and interests could be enlisted on the side of 
order by granting him denizenship. This appears to have 
been the position of Rees ap Thomas, a Cardiganshire 

1 Que nulle homme Galeys desormes soit Justice, Chamberlain, Chaun- 
celler, Seneschal, Resceivour, chief Forestier, Viscompt, eschetour, ne 
conestable de chastel . . ; mais, soient angloys en mesmes les offices . . ; 
Item que nulle homme Engloys par touz les partiez de Gales soit endite ou 
attache par hatie et envie de Galoys,. .soit convict par enquest des Galoys 
de nulle chose a luy surmys ; Item que nulle homme ne femme Engloys 
se marient a nulle homme ne femme Galoys ; Item, que les Burges Englois 
de Villes ne receveint nulle homme de demy sang del partie Galois destre 
enfranchiez deinz leurs villes. 

Ordinates Walliae. 2 Henry IV, March 18. Record of Carnarvon, 
239, seq. See also " Statute of Wastours and Rymours " 4 Henry IV. 



20 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

chieftain, who was admitted to the full rights of a citizen 
in 1413, and was the first thus to be favoured, unless we carry 
our history further back than the accession of Henry V, 
Rees subsequently held an official position of some moment 
in West Wales and received the alien priory of St Clear's 1 . 
Some years later, Griffith ap Nicholas was granted the 
privileges of Englishmen for similar reasons. To have made 
him the victim of a harsh penal code would have been unwise, 
perhaps dangerous. The same may be said of Griffith Dwnn 
to whom, in 1421, Parliament granted the full liberties of 
a loyal subject 2 . His family played a conspicuous part in 
the politics of the second half of the century. 

The penal laws, in that they forbade a Welshman to 
hold or purchase lands in England, affected, more by chance 
than by design, the civil rights of those who had migrated 
from Wales to England before the passing of the statutes, 
and had acquired a territorial interest there. But for their 
petitions to parliament, we might never have suspected 
their Welsh origin. Such was Lewis John, who is described 
as having been born of a Welsh father and mother. He 
had acquired a status in England as a freeman of the city 
of London ; he possessed estates in Essex, and was Warden 
of the Mint in London and Calais 3 . John Montgomery 4 
and John Steward were Welshmen who found themselves 
in the same difficulty. Both served with distinction at 
Agincourt, and afterwards in Normandy. The rights of 
such men were separately safeguarded by parliament on 
petition. 

1 In 1438 he was made Steward of Cardigan, Cantrefmawr, and Glyn- 
cothi. In 1 44 1 he and a few others received the alien priories of St Clear's 
and Llangenneth. In 1444 he received Gerardston, Cardiganshire. Rot. 
Pari. iv. 6 ; and Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. 

2 Rot. Pari. (1413-37), 130. 

3 Letters of Margaret of Anjou, 34. Rot. Pari. iv. 44-5. 

4 Rot. Pari. iv. 45, Nicholas, Agincourt ; 379-85. Record Reports 
(1885), 546, which state that John Montgomery was bailiff of Calais and 
captain of Domfront. In 1430 he was on an embassy to the duke of 
Burgundy. 

Proceedings, iv. 72, 324. Rymer, ix. 594-5 ; >:. 458, and passim. 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 21 

It is beyond the scope of the present inquiry to follow 
the careers of these men in detail, or investigate the extent 
to which the people of Wales sought and found a larger 
ambit of enterprise in the general affairs of the country. In 
the Church they are represented by Reginald Pecock, the 
most daring thinker of his age, and by the astute diplomatist 
Philip Morgan, who became Bishop of Worcester and 
Chancellor of Normandy. In war, no soldier of the day won 
greater fame than Mathew Gough ; and but for his brilliance, 
a host of lesser lights from Wales would burn more brightly. 
Owen Tudor gave proof of courtly qualities by winning the 
affection of Queen Catherine. Few mastered the shifts of 
statecraft more successfully than William Herbert. Some 
of these, on account of the eminence they achieved in the 
Wars of the Roses, or the splendour in which they are 
wreathed in contemporary Welsh literature, will appear often 
in our story. Others, like Pecock and Philip Morgan, who 
do not directly affect the story of Wales, have no claims upon 
the present narrative. 

To resume. Many obtained emancipation from civil 
thraldom by their eminent services in the French wars ; 
for example, David ap Thomas of Cardiganshire, in 1427, 
for his unswerving loyalty to Henry V. In this instance 
the liberation was not made hereditary 1 . A few years later 
he was to suffer imprisonment for his adherence to Humphrey, 
duke of Gloucester. In 1430, Rhys ap Madoc " born in 
Wales " received denizenship at the special request of the 
House of Commons for his sovereign heroism at Crevant 
and Verneuil. He appears to have been in personal atten- 
dance upon the duke of Bedford when the latter crossed 
from France to England to compose the differences between 
Cardinal Beaufort and the duke of Gloucester 2 . The yoke 
next fell from the shoulders of Morgan Meredith. He 

1 Rot. Pari. 1427, 325. Cal. Pat. Rolls, sub ann. 

2 Rot. Pari. 1430-1, 372. Record Reports (1887). He received 
protection to cross to France in the duke of Bedford's retinue on February 
7, 1425-6. 



22 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

marked his deliverance by a prosperous trade in barley 
with the Netherlands, and later acquired some ascendancy 
in the local affairs of Kent 1 . In 1432 the franchise was 
bestowed upon Owen ap Meredith, who was probably the 
romantic Owen ap Meredith ap Tudor, better known as 
Owen Tudor 2 . There is a forbidding leanness about this 
grant which betokens flagrant insincerity or 

Owen Tudor. .... . . TT . , . . 

intriguing suspicion. He could not become a 
citizen or a burgess, nor hold a Crown office in any city, 
borough, or market town. By a process of elimination we 
infer that he could bear arms, acquire land, intermarry, 
and serve on a jury. He might hold a household appoint- 
ment, a fact of outstanding significance in his particular 
case. As we shall see, he was already the husband of Queen 
Catherine, though the fact was not generally known. 

Another illuminating case is that of William ap William 
ap Griffith, who described himself as " English on his mother's 
side, being son to Joan, daughter of William Stanley, knight, 
and part English on his father's side." His father, he 
declared, had been loyal to the Crown against Owen Glyndwr, 
and had been despoiled of his lands in consequence. Parlia- 
ment gave a guarded assent to his request ; for William 
was not to marry a Welsh wife, and he was not permitted 
to hold any royal office in Wales 3 . Three years later, 
however, these embarrassing restrictions were removed. The 
Government became more liberal under Edward IV. In 
1468 Morgan ap Meredith of Carnarvonshire, and one 
David Canons, were enabled to become burgesses of any 
Carnarvonshire boroughs, or of any other town in Wales and 
the Marches, with freedom to hold office and carry arms 4 . 

1 Record Reports (1887). January 5, 1442-3. He was on a commis- 
sion to investigate disturbances in 1456. Proceedings of the Privy Council, 
vi. 289. June, 1456. Also, Morgan Meredith of Carmarthen; 1441. 
C.P.R., 560. 

2 Rot. Pari. 10 Henry VI. 415. The relations between Owen and 
Catherine are discussed fully in another chapter. 

3 Rot. Pari, 1439, 16; and 1442, 45. See his pedigree in Dwnn, 11. 89. 

4 Cal. Pat. Rolls, September 26, 1468, 107-8. 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 23 

But of those that were formally emancipated by parlia- 
Griffith ar merit the most aggressive was Griffith ap 

Nicholas. Nicholas, a remarkable character who domin- 

ated West Wales in the middle of the fifteenth century. No 
reliable account of him is extant, for the spurious biographical 
sketch in the Cambrian Register, which was written more 
than a century and a half after his death, is a picturesque 
web of fancy woven to embellish a family pedigree 1 . His 
grandson was that Sir Rhys ap Thomas who is said to have 
deceived Richard III by an ingenious piece of sophistry, 
and who afterwards won a knighthood on Bosworth field. 

Griffith was intensely national, and in his generous 
patronage of the bards faithfully mirrors the Welsh aristo- 
cracy of his day. He is the subject of many a panegyric in 
contemporary poetry where, with pardonable poetic licence, 
he is extolled as the autocrat of the south and the ruler of 
the west from Carmarthen to Anglesey 2 . His home was 
Newton, now Dynevor, near Llandilo, in Carmarthenshire. 
He held the position of approver for the king in Dynevor 
as early as 1425 ; so that he mu=t ^qve obtained release 
from civic servitude before that date, althougn cut parlia- 
mentary recognition of it was only recorded twenty years 
afterwards. Moreover, he was farmer of the lordship of 
Dynevor in 1440 3 . 

A curious instance of the abduction of a woman of 
property gives him a lurid ascendancy which is not sub- 
stantiated by the little we know of him. Margaret, the 
widow of Sir Thomas Maliphant, was journeying from 
Pembrokeshire to London, when she was seized by an 
unscrupulous adventurer Lewis Leyshon, who speciously 

1 I refer to the account of him in the Life of Sir Rhys ap Thomas in 
the Cambrian Register, 1795. The original MS. appears to have been 
written in the early part of the reign of James I, as already stated, Ch. 1. 

2 Lewis Glyn Cothi, 11, 1. See also Iolo MSS. 699, a poem by 
Iorwerth Fynglwyd. Gorchestion Beirdd Cymru, 155, a poem by Gwilym 
ap leuan Hen. The historic eisteddfod at Carmarthen, 1451, was held 
under Griffith's protection. 

3 Minister's Accounts, 1 166-8. John Perot was associated with him. 



24 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

represented himself as her protector against the violence of 
Griffith ap Nicholas. Lewis escorted her in the guise of 
a friend as far as Twygeston, near Bridgend, the home of 
his accomplice, Gilbert Turberville. He then unmasked his 
dark purpose, which was to force her to become his wife. 
Margaret's honour, however, defied imprisonment, brutality, 
as well as the hypocritical pleadings of the parish vicar 1 . 
A similar case of abduction occurred in Lancashire about the 
same time, when Lady Butler was taken from her chamber 
at Bart on wood, and carried off in " her kirtle and her 
smokke " by one William Pulle of Wirral, who compelled 
her to say the words of matrimony in the parish church of 
Bidstone 2 . 

In 1443, by a royal grant, Griffith ap Nicholas was 
invested with the town of Tregaron, and the commote of 
Pennarth in which it was situated, a large district in the 
upper valley of the Teivy, during the minority of Maud, 
daughter and heiress of William Clement 3 . We shall 
probably not be far wrong in attributing this grant to the 
favourable influence of Hump fcrey, duke of Gloucester, who 
had been made Chief Justice of South Wales in 1440, and 
who spent some time in Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire 
during these years, for Griffith soon became one of the 
duke's most devoted followers. 

He continued to advance in power and position in 
subsequent years. In 1444 he was formally admitted as 
a fully privileged English subject 4 . The penal code was 
by this time tottering ominously : " Welshmen in increasing 
numbers seek to be citizens and to have the same freedom 
as Englishmen, which will be to the utter destruction of 
all Englishmen." Such were the words of the burgesses 

1 Rot. Pari. 1439-40, 14. Lewis Glyn Cothi, i, ioo. Arch. Cambrensis, 
1864, 247. 

2 Rot. Pari. 1436-37 ; July. 497-8. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 29 April, 1448. See a grant to Lewis ap Meredith, 
esquire of the household, of ^20 yearly rendered by Griffith ap Nicholas 
for Tregaron and Pennarth. The grant to Griffith bears date July 24, 1443. 

* Rot. Pari. 1444, 104. 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 25 

of North Wales who, becoming alarmed at the robust vitality 
of the Welsh, petitioned parliament to put an end to it. 
Parliament, in acquiescing, specifically exempted William 
Bulkley of Anglesey, " an Englishman who had married 
a woman of half-blood Welsh," and Griffith ap Nicholas. 
This indirect allusion is our only official record of Griffith's 
denizenship, but it implies that he had received it some years 
previously. At a later period his name appears on a 
number of commissions. For example, in 1445, he was 
authorised with a few others to inquire into the felonies 
of one David ap Meredith of Aberystwyth 1 . 

The number of those thus formally unfettered by parlia- 
ment was comparatively few. Nevertheless, it 

The towns r J 

of the should not be assumed that the laws against 

Welshmen were equally stringent throughout 
Wales. Their own selfish propensities, and the struggle for 
existence in the turbid pools of riot, compelled the lords- 
marcher to lean towards tolerance ; for the greater the 
number of law-abiding burgesses, the greater the security 
in the towns on their demesnes, and the greater their 
revenues. 

It may be asserted with a fair degree of probability, that 
the early towns of Wales were not so exclusively foreign as 
they are sometimes represented to have been. It is certain 
that there was no general prohibition against the Welsh on 
the part of the lords-marcher, in whose demesnes most of the 
towns came into existence. Nor did the unfortunate results 
of Glyndwr's rebellion operate for any length of time so as 
to exclude Welshmen from the towns of the Marches. In 
1406 Edward Charlton granted a charter to Welshpool, 
according to which only Welshmen " who were with us in 
the rebellion shall be taken into the liberty." There were 
Welsh bailiffs in Tenby in the first decade of the fifteenth 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, sub ann. 369; Stephenson, 11, 508. Other members of 
the above commission were Owen Dwnn, David Morys, Morgan Doe (? Dwnn) 
and William Burley. 



26 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

century. A charter of the Mortimers to Usk about the 
same time declares that the corporation " having obtained 
our licence may freely make any Welshman a burgess of our 
town 1 ." But if there was a less stringent regime in the 
Marches, it cannot be too strongly emphasised that the penal 
code perpetuated the cleavage between the two nations, 
discouraged the Welsh from peaceful enterprise, and produced 
considerable irritation, especially in the shires. 

So far we have dealt mainly with those causes of unrest 
which might be traced directly to Owen 

Welsh and ° J 

English Glyndwr's rising. There were others of a 

more remote origin. Since the conquest of the 
Principality by Edward I, Wales had been divided into 
shire-ground and the Marches. The shires were Anglesey, 
Merionethshire, Carnarvonshire, Carmarthenshire, Cardigan- 
shire and Flintshire. There were two counties-palatine, 
namely, the earldom of Pembroke, and the lordship of 
Glamorgan. In all these the organisation was in every 
respect similar to that of an English county. The rest of 
Wales was known as the Marches. Here every lord was 
a law unto himself. 

Throughout the Marches Welsh and English customs 
existed side by side, but the tendency was for the latter 
to encroach upon the former. Thus, in 1415, the Welsh 
chieftains on the estates of the duchy of Lancaster in West 
Wales petitioned that they should hold their lands according 
to the custom of their forefathers, and that estates should 
not escheat to the Crown in default of heirs direct 2 . Some- 
times dues exacted according to English law were super- 
imposed upon those exacted by Welsh law. In 1417, 
Edward Stradling and the tenants of Bassaleg, in the seignory 
of Newport, were distrained upon for a tallage ; but the 

1 For a fuller treatment of this question see an article by the author 
on " The Welsh and the Early Municipalities," in Celtic Review ; Jan. 1908. 

* Rot. Pari. 3 Henry V, 91. Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, was their 
overlord. His tenants petitioned that " l'avant dites terres ne serroient 
seisez en vos mains autrement que la loi Galoise demande." 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 27 

seizures were afterwards restored to them on the ground 
that the tallage had not been paid in ancient times except 
when the lord attained his majority 1 . 

There were instances where the burden became intolerable, 
and many of the villeins were driven to seek elsewhere a 
more lenient rule, or a more adventurous existence. In 1446, 
the king's bondsmen of North Wales were absolved from 
the duty of executing felons, to which they were compelled 
by the sheriff, " by reason whereof bondmen have gone 
from the counties to divers parts of England, so that many 
towns are desolate, and rents and services and pence are 
taken away 2 ." In some parts villeinage was rampant in 
its most hideous form. In 1449 a number of villeins were 
sold to William Griffith of North Wales " with their suc- 
cessors procreated and to be procreated, and all their 
goods 3 ." 

Of all the plagues that infested the stricken land the 
official worst was that of official tyranny. This state- 

tyranny. ment applies more especially to the royal shires. 

Here the officials from the " Warnester," or watcher at 
the town gate, to the constable of the castle, from the bailiff 
to the sheriff, were aliens whose sympathies were rudely 
antagonistic to Welsh sentiment. Only in the lower orders 
of the Church did the native element predominate. During 
the first half of the century all the sheriffs of the counties 
of North Wales were English. So also were the constables 
of the castles, the chamberlains and the justices. The 
same is true of South Wales. Whenever we meet with the 
constables of Cardigan, Aberystwyth, Dynevor, Dryslwyn, 
Carmarthen, Laugharne, or even with such minor officials 

1 Acts and Proceedings of the Privy Council, II. 215-6. February, 1417. 
See a writ issued to the Sheriff of the seignory, Morgan ap Evan ap Jankyn 
his lieutenant, and Morgan ap Roger (Rosser) his coroner. The lord of the 
seignory was the earl of Stafford. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, March 29, 1446. 426. Cf. Wynne, 83. 

3 See the original document printed in Beaumaris Bay, 25, bearing the 
date 20 June, 1449. For this William Griffith see ante. Compare this with 
the tendency to emancipate bondmen in England, e.g. on the lands of the 
monastery of St Albans. Whethamstede, 11, passim. 



28 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

as porters, they are invariably English. It is not until the 
accession of Edward IV that a change appears. 

The cleavage between the two peoples, and especially 

the clash between the native element and 

of h contim- nce th eir English officials, is faithfully mirrored in 

porary contemporary Welsh literature, one of the chief 

literature. r J 

features of which, as we have already remarked, 
is its hostility towards the Saxon. The poet Lewis 
Glyn Cothi, for example, exults in the rise of Griffith ap 
Nicholas to official status because he views it as the opening 
of a new era, when " the Saxon will no longer be found 
presiding over the Sessions or holding an official position 
amongst us 1 ." It is in the poets of the period, too, that we 
must seek a true expression of the temper of public opinion 
in face of the disabilities under which the people laboured. 
Although contemporary poetry was produced largely at the 
command of the rich, and to eulogise them, and thus savours 
of a fawning timidity in dealing with social evils, nevertheless, 
there are many suggestive references to a deep and wide- 
spread unrest. " Life is sad and heavy, men who were 
formerly in bondage are gradually becoming more enslaved," 
says Lewis Glyn Cothi 2 . 

The same poet frequently calls upon his heroes to draw 
their swords in defence of the common people and the 
innocent 3 . Similarly Guto'r Glyn, in a glowing panegyric 
to Edward IV : " Woe betide us who have been born in 

1 Ni welir Sais diddirwy 

Na Saison mewn Sessiwn mwy, 
Na dyn o Sais yn dwyn swydd. 

Lewis Glyn Cothi, Works I. xxiv. 

2 Mae bywyd trist, mae byd trvvm ; 
Meibion a gweision oedd gaeth 
Myned weithion maent waethwaeth. 

Ibid. I. xx. 

3 A'th gledd bydd geidwad 

Ar gwmmin werin hyd gaer Warwig gron 
Ac ar y gwirion o'th gaer gerrig. 

Glyn Cothi, Ode to Watcyn Vaughan. 
" From thy stone castle come forward, sword in hand, to defend the 
common people and the defenceless." 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 29 

servitude, and are the prey of strong thieves. Restore order. 
Come thyself, valiant Edward, and check the oppressors 1 ." 

Nor did the overbearing temper of the nobility, and the 
decline of Welsh law and custom escape the poets. Lewis 
Glyn Cothi implores Owen ap Griffith " to mete out justice 
to the proud, and restore their ancient customs to the 
timid 2 ." Similarly he appeals to another patron to " restore 
to Wales her own law 3 ." Guto'r Glyn bewails the social 
restrictions which debarred anyone not of baronial lineage 
from rising above his station, and vigorously assails the 
ineffectiveness of the ecclesiastical law to curb the im- 
moderate licence of the clergy. One of the noblest features 
of Thomas ap Rosser, a chieftain slain at Edgecote, was that 
he evinced practical sympathy for the common people 4 . 

Bearing these circumstances in mind, it is not difficult 
to realise that contempt of law, which was 
general throughout the country, found most 
congenial soil in the Marches, where every lord was responsible 
for the maintenance of order within his own territories, and 
was frequently not without reason to subvert it. It is a 
commonplace of history that the Marches experienced every 
species of lawlessness which national acerbities, official vindic- 
tiveness, and the negation of effective judicial administration, 
could engender in a land of pathless woods and inaccessible 
mountains 5 . The Marches were deluged by all the barbarous 

1 Gwae ni o'n geni yn gaeth 
Gan ladron ; gwna lywodraeth. 
Dyred dy hun, Ed wart hir, 

I ffrwyno cyrph rhai anwir. 

Guto'r Glyn, MSS., Cardiff. Hafod, 3. 

2 Rhoi cyfraith berffaith i'r beilch 
Rhoi devawd i'r rhai diveilch. 

Glyn Cothi, 1. 139. 

3 Enyn y gyfraith unig i Gymru. 

Ibid. 1. 35. Also Cein. Lien. 11. 193. 

4 Lewis Glyn Cothi. Ode to Thomas ap Rosser. 

5 It is not our intention to digress upon the constitutional position of 
the lord-marcher. For a full exposition the reader may be referred to the 
admirable work of Morris, Welsh Wars of Edward I. See also Skeel, 
Council of Wales, Introduction ; George Owen's Treatise on the Government 
of Wales, in the Cymmrodor, vols. xn. and xm. ; etc. For the lawlessness 
of the Marches, see Wynne's History of the Gwydir Family, Wright's Ludlow, 



30 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

evils of a degenerate feudalism, countless in number and 
variety. Scientific atrocity had almost become an axiom of 
life. The savage licence and wolfish avarice of the strong 
were let loose upon the weak and the law-abiding. No 
recorded deed of romantic heroism relieves the abject bru- 
tality of a Lord Powys, the murderer of Griffith Vaughan 1 , 
or the dexterous perfidy of a Grey of Ruthin. There is no 
splendid villainy even, such as is recorded in the annals of 
some of the Italian states during the century, unless it be 
the murder of Sir Christopher Talbot who was struck to 
the heart at his own castle of Caws 2 . Official records present 
nothing better than a frightful spectacle of barbarity, a 
catalogue of robberies and tragedies. 

The chief sufferers were the inhabitants of Herefordshire, 
Gloucestershire and Shropshire, who frequently reported 
their grievances to Parliament. Their cornfields were 
ruined, their stock reduced to ashes, their cattle driven to 
the mountains ; and not infrequently they were themselves 
imprisoned until heavy ransoms were paid. Merchants who 
plied their trade in the west were the prey of a godless 
nobility and a brutalised peasantry. Security of transit 
was impossible where the king's writ did not run 3 . The 
estuary of the Severn swarmed with pirates, every creek 
giving shelter to its seadogs who had their accomplices in 
the towns. 

They issued forth like an armed fleet in battle array 4 . 
The merchants of Bristol were not more immune than those 
of Ireland or Denmark 5 . Stolen cattle and stock were 
transferred recklessly by night from one side of the Severn 



Eyton's Shropshire. Archaeologia Cambrensis, vols, n., in. Rot. Pari. 
Statutes of the Realm, etc. 

1 There are many references to the affair in Trevelyan Papers (Camden 
Society). Powysland Collections, I. 335-8, 11. 139-168 ; xiv. 126-138. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 21 Henry VI, 397. 

3 " Ou le brief du roy ne court." Rot. Pari. 1413-37, 52. 

4 Rot. Pari. 1430-31. " En grande nombre arraiez en faire de 
guerre." Ibid. 1427 ; 332. 

5 Acts of the Privy Council, iv. 208. April 28, 1434. 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 31 

to the other, and robbers were not to be deterred by legislation 
forbidding night-ferrying. The peasantry retaliated upon 
the insolence and ferocity of the municipal officials of North 
Wales by organised raids upon Conway, Dolgelly and 
Beaumaris on market days, which sometimes ended in 
bloodshed 1 . If the people were wronged they were not 
so servile as to return thanks for it. 

It need hardly be stated that this bewildering lawlessness 
was not the work of irresponsible hordes of outlaws and 
hardened ruffians. Those who were not to be constrained 
to the mean duties of villeins, when villeinage was fast 
becoming an anachronism, simply became the retainers of 
a depraved nobility whose predatory habits they aped. 
John Talbot of Goodrich Castle was a valiant soldier. In 
1424 his services were required in France to assist in rescuing 
Crotoy. He refused to go until he had indemnified himself 
for the arrears of his wages, as constable of Montgomery 
Castle, by a profitable raid upon the prosperous citizens and 
farmers of Herefordshire 2 . Sir Reginald Grey and Hugh 
Wenlok were also among his unfortunate victims 3 . William 
Fitzwarren levied a body of armed men in Wales and de- 
prived Richard Hankford of Whittington of his castle. The 
Corbets were bold enough to abuse and rob the collectors 
of the fifteenth in Shrewsbury 4 . John ap Meredith, a cousin 

1 Lewis Glyn Cothi, vn. iii ; v. vii. A dark episode called the " Black 
Affray of Beaumaris " between the burgesses of that town and the Welsh 
of Anglesey ended in the death of the leader, David ap Ieuan of Llwydiarth. 
For more minute details of the lawless state of the Snowdon district, see 
Hengwrt MSS. in Arch. Cambrensis, 1846-8 ; viz. the Records of Inqui- 
sitions for Merionethshire (1452-4). 

2 Ordinances of the Privy Council, February 14, 1424 ; in. 138. Rot. Pari. 
1424 ; 254. The names of some of the retainers may be of some interest : 
William ap Rees, David ap Jankyn, Thomas Walter, John Rotherwas, 
John Gam, John Roger, William Prees, Philip Madoc, David Miskyn, 
Jankyn ap Adam, Hugh ap Adam, John Gronowe, Walter ap Hugh, 
Griffith Kilbrest, Howel Sheplod, John ap David, Ieuan ap Gronowe, 
Ieuan Vaughan, Philip Iorwerth, Morys Penreth, Thomas ap Richard, 
Griffith Elvel. 

3 Rot. Pari. 1425, 275 and 312. Both petitioned Parliament to compel 
Talbot to give security that he would keep the peace. 

4 Rot. Pari. 1422, 193; and. ibid. 1414-5, 30, 87. Also, Record Reports, 
i4ig ; 709. 



32 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

of Owen Tudor, fought out his feuds alternately with William 
Griffith, chamberlain of North Wales, and the Thelwalls of 
Dyffryn Clwyd 1 . 

About the year 1442 the blaze of riot raged with amazing 

fury, private property and public finance being 
multiply equally involved in the general ruin. It was 

found impossible to arrest miscreants. They 
passed from one lordship to another, and " having 
no place certain to tarry " transferred their ill-gotten wealth 
to places of security, and themselves beyond the reach of 
law and justice 2 . There was no decent reverence for the 
monasteries. Some years previously a papal bull had 
empowered the abbot of Margam to excommunicate a number 
of people who had despoiled the abbey of Neath 3 . But the 
pope's curse could not kill a fly, and his servants could be 
bought for a song 4 . The abbey of Strata Florida was placed 
under the care and government of the abbots of Whitland 
and Margam because the abbot could not guard it against 
strong thieves and robbers 5 . The abbot of Basingwerk, 
in Flintshire, complained of his losses through riots and 
robberies 6 . The abbot of Vale Royal in Cheshire lodges a 
similar complaint that " whereas he is fiefed of Llanbadarn 
and other property in the counties of Cardigan and Carmar- 
then, and as in the said shires are some Welshmen to whom 
the said abbot has not given such rewards as they desired, 
they have indicted him at the sessions of divers felonies to 
compel him to give them rewards and fees ; and when he 
came to appear to the indictment he could not pass through 
certain lordships without being assaulted and beaten 7 ." 

Moreover, " Welshmen accused of treason have been 
found to come into the towns and markets and stay there 

1 Wynne, History of the Gwydir Family, 44-7. 

2 Rot. Pari. 1441-2, 53-4 etc. 

3 Glamorgan Charters, 1500 (1423). 

4 Lewis Glyn Cothi, passim. 

5 Glamorgan Charters, 1590 (1443, March 3). Cal. Pat. Rolls, 95 (1442). 
8 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 1442, 42. 

7 Rot. Pari. 1442 ; 42-3. 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 33 

for several days without being arrested, because the sheriff 
and his ministers oftentimes have no knowledge of their 
persons nor of their being within the said county, some for 
favour and amity, some for doubt of hurt 1 ." Such obliquity 
of conduct as these extracts reveal necessarily affected the 
royal revenues. The Exchequer suffered by an extensive 
evasion of customs' dues on merchandise passing through 
Wales and the Marches. Tenants and others in North and 
South Wales 2 were frequently summoned to pay their debts 
by instalments, or otherwise to answer for the amounts due 
from them. 

Further, a number of native chieftains were about the 
same time outlawed or placed under arrest. The ringleader 
in Carnarvonshire was Evan ap Robin 3 ; in the valley of the 
Dee, Sir Griffith Vaughan 4 ; in Carmarthenshire, Owen, the 
son of Griffith ap Nicholas. The Privy Council ordered 
Owen to be placed under arrest ; Griffith himself and the 
Abbot of Whitland were summoned to appear before the 
Privy Council ; while some militant monk who had been 
traversing North and South Wales holding riotous assemblies 
called cymmorthau, narrating Welsh chronicles and traditions, 
and stirring up the people to rebellion, was immediately 
" to be found out and taken 5 ." That this agitator was one 
of the bardic fraternity may be presumed with a fair degree 



1 Statutes of the Realm, 1444-5 ; Rot. Pari. 1444-5, 106. 

2 Proceedings of the Privy Council, v. 209. 29 August, 1442. " A 
levy to be made of various sums due to the king from South Wales. Rhys 
ap Thomas ap David, 10 marks ; John ap Rees ap Thomas, 10 marks ; 
David ap Thomas ap David ap Llewelyn, £71. 135. qd. ; Meredith ap Owen, 
/133. 6s. 8d. ; Rees Vaughan ap Rees, £90 ; Maredydd ap Ievan ap Rees, 
^22. 13s. 4^. ; Llywelyn ap David ap Rees, £11. is. od." Also, ibid. in. 78, 
1423. Rot Pari. 1442. 

3 See document in Wynne's Gwydir Family, 34-5, note 3. 

4 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 1444, 281. In July of that year Griffith Vaughan of 
Treflidyan, Kt, Ievan ap Griffith of Gildesford, Reynold ap lord Griffith of 
Treflidyan, and David Lloyd ap Ievan ap Griffith of Gildesford, etc. were 
outlawed, and their property (Breamiarth, in Pole) given to John Sutton, 
Lord Dudley. — See above for the murder of Griffith Vaughan by Henry 
Grey, Lord Powys, in 1447. 

* Acts of the Privy Council, v. 244, 233. 5 March, 1443. Griffith ap 
Nicholas was in London in January, 1442. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 12. 

E. W. R. 3 



34 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

of certainty. He may, indeed, have been Lewis Glyn Cothi, 
the most fervid nationalist of his time, whose spirit chafed 
beneath the miseries and humiliations of political and social 
servitude. For he himself admits that he was at one time 
hunted down by the officers of justice, and that he was then 
sheltered by Owen ap Griffith ap Nicholas 1 . As we have 
just remarked, Owen was also under the ban of the law at 
this time ; and as Glyn Cothi was his neighbour, both may 
have been acting together. 

This defiance of law and order continued with varying 
success until the Tudors finally smothered it through the 
instrumentality of the Court of the President and Council 
of Wales and the Marches. Meanwhile, the administration 
of justice rested with the sheriffs of the counties and the 
lords of the Marches. They failed notoriously, either from 
self-interest, or gross absenteeism, or ineptitude. Conse- 
quently the Privy Council was constrained to interfere. 

Although empty proclamations rather than energetic 
Attempts to action generally characterised its proceedings, 
restore order, ^q Privy Council was obviously apprehensive 
about Wales. One of the royal castles might at any time 
fall into the hands of the lawless element ; and a reduction 
of castles held by Welsh rebels had been a costly business 
during Glyndwr's wars 2 . The efficiency of the castle 

1 Lewis Glyn Cothi, n. ii. 

A mi'n nhiredd Gwynedd gynt 

Yn herwa, yno hirhynt, 

Owain i gadw fy einioes 

Ei aur a'i win i'm a roes. 
" When formerly I was wandering in Gwynedd, Owen gave me his gold 
and his wine to save my life." 

1 can see no evidence to support the generally accepted view that 
Lewis Glyn Cothi was hunted as a Lancastrian partisan. See the editor's 
note on the above passage, for example. 

2 Ordinances of the Privy Council, 23 Jan. 1415, 339- See a petition 
from Gerard Strong praying that a warrant might be issued commanding 
the exchequer to grant him a discharge for the metal of a brass cannon 
called " Messager " weighing 4480 lbs, which was burst at the siege of 
Aberystwyth ; of a cannon called the " King's Daughter," burst at the 
siege of Harlech ; of a cannon which burst in proving it ; of a cannon 
with two chambers ; of two iron guns, and three other iron guns ; with 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 35 

garrisons in North Wales, therefore, had been a matter of 
concern to Henry V. He stipulated that no burgess 
should be received into the king's wages at the castle, 
and any who had been so received were to be discharged 
and replaced by others. The burgess was not as efficient 
as the professional soldier ; and as the burgesses constituted 
themselves into an armed force at need, the employment 
of a burgess as a castle soldier implied a weakening of the 
combined force of town and castle. Another difficulty 
which Henry V had tried to grapple with was the absen- 
teeism of sheriffs, for it was enacted that none were to be 
appointed to that office who would not perform their duties 
in person 1 . 

On the death of Henry V, the minority of his son and the 
continuance of the French war multiplied the difficulties of 
the Privy Council. Sometimes, as in 1422, commissions 
would be appointed to try and secure peace. But, with grim 
irony, the chief members were themselves the advocates and 
propellors of incendiarism, such as the Talbots 2 . On one 
occasion it was proposed to place the administration of 
private lands, viz. those of the Skydmores of Herefordshire, 
in the power of the Council itself, " lest riots and other 
inconveniences should arise 3 ." But there were too many 
cross currents of interest, and privilege was too well fortified, 
for the extension of such a project. Another time an attempt 
was made to check absenteeism : all the constables of castles 
in Wales were directed to return to their posts, and the lords- 
marcher to hold their courts on one day, and to see that the 
law was duly obeyed within their own jurisdictions 4 . 



gunpowder, cross-bows and arrows delivered to various captains of castles 
or used at the aforesaid sieges. 

1 Ibid. 25 October, 141 7, 238-9. 

2 Rymer's Foedera, x. 254. 3 Oct. 1422. John Talbot, William Talbot, 
and Edmund Ferrers of Chartley were on this commission. 

3 Proceedings of the Privy Council. 9 Feb. 1422, 320— 1. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 
1446, 264. 

4 Proceedings of the Privy Council, v. 3. 21 Nov., 1436. Minutes on 
the Government of Wales. 



36 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

In 1437 a more comprehensive scheme was lodged. It 
a proposed was proposed to ascertain who the lords- 
councii. marcher were, and to appoint a special com- 

mittee to deal solely with the affairs of the Principality and 
the Marches 1 . In pursuance of this plan, the lords were 
summoned to the Privy Council in the following year to 
assist in the formation of the proposed committee 2 . 
But, probably on account of the lethargy and the selfishness 
of those concerned, nothing was done. Nevertheless, the 
proposal is of constitutional interest as being apparently the 
first suggestion that the affairs of Wales and the Marches 
should be administered by a distinct council, the plan which 
subsequently materialised in the shape of the Council of 
Wales and the Marches. Five years later, in 1442, when 
the political temperature of the Marches was inordinately 
high, the laws of Edward I with regard to the administration 
of justice in Wales were examined, and the lords of the 
Marches were ordered to confer and take instant action, 
a task in which the duke of York promised actively to assist. 
In case they refused the Government threatened to find 
some drastic remedy. This was no empty boast. For on 
August 12, 1443, a conference actually took place at Harlech 
between Henry Norris, the deputy-chamberlain of Carnarvon, 
and the gentry of Merionethshire, to try and still the 
tempest of feud and riot. In October they came before 
the Council 3 . 

It may be remarked that other provincial assemblies 
provincial are recorded in the reign of Edward IV. But 

assemblies. they were summoned to vote money rather 
than to restore order. In 1466 the freeholders and towns- 
people of Anglesey agreed upon a subsidy of 400 marks to 

1 Proceedings of the Privy Council, v. 81-2. 25 Nov., 1437. 

s Proceedings of the Privy Council. 16 Feb., 1438, vol. v. 92. Ibid. 
1442, 211-213. 

3 For a history of the Council of Wales see Skeel's Court and Council 
of Wales and the Marches ; The Cymmrodor, xn.-xv. and xix. ; and the 
authorities quoted. For the above conference see Medieval Boroughs of 
Snowdonia. 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 37 

be paid within six years ; while in 1473 Cardiganshire and 
Carmarthenshire voted a tollage to the Prince of Wales in 
honour of his first visit to the country 1 . 

One result of the prevailing anarchy was a periodical 
tightening of the penal fetters. The statutes against the 
Welsh were confirmed in 143 1, and again two years later 2 ; 
though it was not until 1447 that the most elaborate and 
ponderous engine of oppression which the bigoted tyranny 
of officials could conceive was brought to bear upon the 
native element. This was at the parliament of Bury, which 
was assembled at the time of the death of Humphrey, duke 
of Gloucester ; and we shall be able to understand the 
circumstances more clearly if we consider the relations 
between Wales and the duke. 

Humphrey had acquired a personal interest in Wales as 
far back as 1414, when he was created earl of 
dukTof re ' Pembroke. He was lord of Tenby and Cilger- 

w°"es. ster '" ran > an d his possessions included the castle of 
Llanstephan, near Carmarthen, which he had 
obtained as a reward for his services at Agincourt. The 
place had been forfeited to the Crown by the treason of 
its possessor, Henry Gwyn, who had fought for the French 
in that battle 3 . In 1427 Gloucester was made justice of 
North Wales. He came to Chester in that year, presumably 
in his capacity as chief justice 4 , while in the following year 
we find him holding an inquisition at Bala 5 . In 1433 he held 
a court at Pembroke, and investigated a case of disputed in- 
heritance. In 1437 he was appointed a justice in Anglesey 6 . 

1 Antiquary, vol. xvi. Ministers' Accounts. 

2 Statutes of the Realm, 1431, C. 3. Rot. Pari, sub ann. 377. In 1442, 
at the instigation of the border counties, Parliament passed a number 
of laws against the harbouring of robbers, and called upon the sheriffs 
to be more alert and stringent. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 1415-16, 129. Nicholas, Agincourt, 175. Cf. Ap- 
pendix I, p. 63. 

4 Vicker's Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, Appendix A, 437. 

5 Powysland Collections, 1. 254. 

6 Rot. Pari. iv. 474. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 19, 376, 452 ; Ma the w Wogan and 
Thomas Perot were present at the investigation. 



38 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

In 1440 the office of chief justice of South Wales was 
conferred upon him, and in August of the following year 
he held sessions at Carmarthen and Cardigan " to settle the 
disturbances and quarrels which existed between the in- 
habitants of those parts," a task which involved him in 
" great costs and labour 1 ." 

As we have seen, the years 1441 to 1443 were a period 
of unusual unrest and insecurity. Gloucester hoped to 
turn it to some advantage and to release his wife, Eleanor 
Cobham, who had been removed from Kent to Chester 
in 1442. At least, the wording of a pardon which was 
granted to Thomas Herbert, one of Gloucester's retinue, 
after the duke's death, states as much ; and it is significant 
that Eleanor was removed from Chester to Kenilworth next 
year, although she again returned to Wales (probably Flint 
Castle) in 1447, the year in which Humphrey died 2 . It is 
unnecessary to enter fully into the bitter court factions 
which culminated in the death of the duke of Gloucester. 
He condemned the cession of Maine, and led the opposition 
to Queen Margaret and Suffolk, who were determined to 
silence him. His impeachment was prepared. Parliament 
was summoned to meet at Bury St Edmunds in February, 
1447. Gloucester came to Bury with a bodyguard of eighty 
horsemen 3 . One authority states that he came up directly 
from Wales, a statement to which the large number of 
Welshmen in his retinue lends support 4 . On his way he 
passed through Greenwich 5 . 

On their arrival at Bury on February 18, Gloucester and 
His weish some of his most prominent attendants were 
retinue. arrested. Amongst these were Sir Henry Wogan, 

1 Proceedings, v. 138-9 ; Introduction, lxxxvi. and in. 267. See also 
Doyle 11. 23. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 1447; 68, 74-5. Vicker's Humphrey duke of 
Gloucester, 273-4. 

3 English Chronicle, edited Davies, 116. 

4 Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 150. 

6 Rymer, xi. 179 ; a pardon to Thomas Herbert " armiger, formerly 
of Greenwich," which states that Gloucester proceeded from Greenwich 
to Bury. He appears to have passed through Wiltshire. Stow, 386. 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 39 

the duke's steward in the earldom of Pembroke 1 , Thomas 
Herbert, the elder brother of William Herbert (afterwards 
earl of Pembroke), John Wogan and Howel ap David ap 
Thomas 2 . Three days later, which was Shrove Tuesday, 
twenty-eight more of his retainers were sent to various 
places of confinement. Gloucester died on the 23rd February 
and was buried at St Albans, being accompanied thither 
by about twenty of his own entourage 3 . 

One of the charges levelled by his accusers against 
Humphrey was that he had endeavoured to raise a rebellion 
in Wales. They " enfourmed falsli the king, and sayde that 
he wolde raise the Welshmenne for to distresse him (Suffolk) 
and destroie him 4 ." There is no reliable evidence of the 
existence of such a plot ; his servants certainly did not 
suspect that anything untoward was maturing until they had 
been placed under arrest 5 . On the other hand it is easy 
to realise how plausible such a charge would appear when 
once put forward. Wales had acquired unenviable notoriety 
as the nursery of treasonable enterprises. Dark suspicion 
attached to the very name. Throughout the reign she had 
been the cause of much anxiety to the central government. 
At this very moment the Marches were a welter of implacable 
feuds and national acerbities. A few years before one of 
Gloucester's retinue, Griffith ap Nicholas, had been summoned 
before the Council, and the family implicated in riots. 

Moreover, Humphrey's enthusiastic and liberal patronage 
of learning appealed with special force to the Welsh poets, 

1 Welsh MSS. British Museum, Edward Owen, i. 618. Sir Roger 
Chamberlain and one Thomas Weryot were also among those who were 
arrested that day. 

2 This is probably an error for David ap Thomas. There is no son 
Howel in the list given by Ellis, although there is a David ap Thomas, 
and his two sons Griffith and Rees. 

This Thomas Herbert, according to William of Worcester, Itinerarium, 
122, had fought in France under Richard, duke of York, and in Portugal 
at the head of 300 men. He was a brother to William Herbert, and died at 
Troye. He appears in a plea of debt in 1442. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 1442, 14. 

3 English Chronicle, edit. Davies, 11 7-8. 

4 Ibid. 62. 

B Gregory's Chronicle, 188. 



40 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. 

and he found favour amongst them. Lewis Glyn Cothi, in 
an ode to Roger Kynaston, alludes to him in terms of 
admiration 1 . One of these bards had been traversing the 
country preaching insurrection, and that about the time 
when Eleanor Cobham was removed from Chester to Kenil- 
worth. The duke of Gloucester was chief justice of South 
Wales, and, as we have seen, paid several visits to the 
country. Such a combination of circumstances made 
admirable soil in which to sow the seed of a charge of con- 
spiracy. 

Of the prisoners, Sir Henry Wogan and Thomas Herbert 
were sent to London, Owen Dwnn to Wallingford, and 
Griffith ap Nicholas and David ap Thomas to the king's 
Bench 2 . David ap Thomas had been a prisoner in the 
Fleet in 1443. He may have been involved in the distur-. 
bance in Wales at. that period. He was removed to Car- 
marthen Castle where he was detained until Sir William ap 
Thomas found the necessary security of a thousand marks 3 . 
In the following July, five members of Gloucester's retinue, 
including Richard Middleton and Thomas Herbert, were tried 

1 Lewis Glyn Cothi, v. 1. Ode to Sir Roger Kynaston. 

Wyr y Dug, a vu wx da 

O Glousedr, myn bagl Assa. 
" He (Kynaston) was a grandson of the duke of Gloucester, who was an 
honourable man." This Kynaston had married Elizabeth, daughter to 
Henry Grey, Lord Powys, who was created earl of Tankerville by Henry V, 
and who had married Antigone, a daughter of Humphrey, duke of Glou- 
cester. 

2 The full list of prisoners is as follows, the names in brackets showing 
where they were imprisoned : Sir Henry Wogan, Thomas Herbert, Griffith 
ap David ap Thomas, and Evan ap Jenkyn (London) ; Jenkyn Thawe, 
Jankyn Lloyd Wogan, and John Wogan (Berkhampstead) ; William Wogan, 
Evan ap Jankyn ap Rees, and William ap John ap David ap Thomas 
Lloyd (Reading) ; William Wogan, William ap Thomas ap Robert ap Rees, 
and Henry Wogan (Leeds Castle, Kent) ; Alun ap Meredith ap Philip Madoc, 
Rees ap David ap Thomas, and Thomas ap Jankyn ap Rees (Norwich) ; 
Owen Dwnn, and Hugh Bennoth (Wallingford) ; John Eynon, and Hugh 
ap Thomas (Guildford) ; John ap Rees, Richard ap Robert, and William 
ap John (Southampton) ; David ap Thomas, Hugh ap Thomas, and Griffith 
ap Nicholas (King's Bench) ; Morgan (Nottingham). Ellis Letters, second 
series, 1. 108-9. 

3 Proceedings, v. 229, 272. He appears as a pledge for Griffith ap 
Nicholas on the latter's appointment as farmer of Dynevor. West Wales 
Hist. Society Transactions, 11. 107-111. 



ii] THE PENAL LAWS 41 

for treason at Deptford, a special commission presided over 
by Suffolk having been appointed for the purpose. They 
were sentenced to death, and were already strung up at 
Tyburn when Suffolk arrived with a pardon from the king. 
Accordingly they were released and for the most part restored 
to their possessions. Suffolk succeeded Humphrey in the 
earldom of Pembroke 1 , although he had been made earl in 
reversion as far back as 1443. 

It is an instructive commentary upon the nervous 
statutes apprehension of parliament with regard to Wales 

against that it now confirmed all the statutes against 

Welshmen, ordaining that " all grants of fran- 
chises, markets, fairs and other freedoms to buy or 
sell, or bake or brew to sell in the towns of North Wales, 
made to any Welshmen before this time, be void and of no 
value ; and that all bondmen of the king be compelled to 
such services and labours as they were accustomed to ; 
and that the officers have power to compel them to do such 
labours and services 2 ." Moreover, in March a special edict 
was issued by the Privy Council enjoining the constables 
of castles in Wales to see to the safety of their charge 3 . 

These drastic measures were in all probability due 
directly to the number of Welsh squires in the duke of 
Gloucester's retinue, and indirectly to the state of anarchy 
in Wales during the four or five years which immediately 
preceded his arrest. There is not sufficient evidence to 
prove that Humphrey schemed to turn this anarchy to 
Suffolk's disadvantage. That seems to have been a mis- 
chievous fabrication emanating from the cunning brain of 
Suffolk. Its only support are the statements in Herbert's 
pardon that Gloucester had endeavoured to release Eleanor 



1 English Chronicle, edit. Davies, 118, Appen. Three Fifteenth Century 
Chronicles, 65. Gregory, 188. Lords Reports, v. 254-5. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 
174. Suffolk also got some of the lands of Herbert. Rymer, 1447, 178. 
Cal. Pat. Rolls, op. cit. 

- Statutes of the Realm, II. 344. Rot. Pari. 1447, 139. 

8 Proceedings, vi. 60. March 19, 1447. 



42 THE PENAL LAWS [ch. ii 

Cobham, and the allegation of Suffolk himself at Bury. 
At the same time, it must be admitted that the circumstances 
were such as to make the allegation plausible enough. 

The state of Wales did not improve afterwards. " Mis- 
governed persons take divers persons and cattle under colour 
of distress where they have no manner, fee, or cause to make 
such distress, but feign actions and quarrels. And many 
times for taking of such distresses and in such resistance 
of them, great assemblies of people, riots, maims and murders 
be made, and if it be not hastily remedied other incon- 
veniences be like to follow, of which takings, bringings, and 
carryings in this behalf no due punishment is, whereof the 
people of the said parts daily abound and increase in evil 
governance 1 ." 

In 1449, therefore, the duke of Buckingham, who wielded 
a wide territorial influence in Mid- Wales, was sent to deal 
with the matter, while the king traversed the Marches to 
lend support if necessary. But the Wars of the Roses were 
already at hand to make confusion more confused 2 . 

1 Rot. Pari. 1447; and 1449, 154. Statutes of the Realm, 27 Henry VI, 
c. 4. The Justices of the Peace were again given additional powers to deal 
with the disorder. 

2 Paston Letters, II, 113. October 16, 1449. 



CHAPTER III 

WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS— MATHEW CxOUGH 

The part played by Wales in the fifteenth century wars 
Welshmen between England and France has not hitherto 
abroad. received even a cursory examination. During 

the prolonged duel which followed the battle of Agincourt 
thousands of Welshmen crossed the sea, the nation's activity 
expending itself freely in the game of war. Archers and 
men-at-arms were greatly in request. The archer's pay was 
twice that of a labourer. Service abroad was a relief from 
disabilities and bondage at home. The lust for booty added 
zest to a life not otherwise unattractive. Such were the 
causes which allured Welshmen to France ; and their deeds 
of valour contributed materially to amplify the little glory 
which relieves the monotonous dreariness of those arid 
years. 

Although a detailed examination of the Agincourt 
campaign as it affected Wales is beyond the pale of the 
present work, it may be of interest to mention the most 
prominent Welshmen who shared in that triumph. 

Sir John Devereux is stated to have brought a force of 
250 men-at-arms and a similar number of foot 

The J 

battle of archers 1 ; Sir John Skydmore of Herefordshire 

had with him four men-at-arms and twelve 

1 Nicholas, Agincourt, 334-384. The lists have been taken from Harl. 
MS. 782, collated with a copy of the MS. marked 1 in the College at Arms. 
Also the unpublished collections for Rymer's Foedera, Sloane MS. 4600, 
British Museum. Calendar of Norman Rolls. See also Royal Historical 
Society Transactions, 3rd series, vol. v. 191 1. It states that the retinue 
of Devereux as given in the lists is impossible. 



44 WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS [ch. 

foot-archers 1 ; John ap Henry 2 and Thomas ap Henry two 
men-at-arms and six foot-archers each ; David Gam, esquire, 
three foot-archers. The greatest number of Welsh levies, 
however, was drawn from Cardiganshire, Carmarthenshire 
and Brecknock, and served under John Merbury who was 
Chamberlain of South Wales at the time 3 . He is credited 
with having had beneath his standard over five hundred 
Welshmen 4 . Thomas Carew also had with him a large body 
of Welshmen 5 . 

Edward Stradling 6 of Glamorgan, John Perot 7 of Pem- 
brokeshire, and William Wogan were with the duke of 

1 Skydmore remained at Harfleur to garrison the town. Royal Hist. 
Soc. Trans. 191 1, 112. Sir John Skydmore of Kenchurch had married 
the daughter of Owen Glyndwr. 

2 John ap Henry received protection, July n, 1415, and Thomas on 
July 12. Record Reports, 1885. 

3 Exchequer Accounts 46/20 ; 45/5. 

4 Merbury's retinue came from Cardiganshire, Brecknock, and Car- 
marthenshire, for whose wages he received ^436 at Hereford. For in- 
dentures, with seals signed at Carmarthen and Brecknock, January 26, 
1415, see Exchequer Accounts 45/5 (10), 46/20. The following are the names 
of the men-at-arms. From 

(a) Carmarthenshire : John ap Rys, Henry ap Ievan, Gwyn Rys 
ap Llywelyn, Griffith Vychan, David ap Ievan ap Trahaiarn, Griffith ap 
Meredith ap Henry (total 5 + 102). 

(b) Cardiganshire : Meredith ap Owen, Owen Mortimer, Owen ap 
Jankyn, Yllort Llywelyn ap Cliffort, Walter ap Ievan ( = 5 + 238, thirteen 
of whom were wounded). 

(c) Brecknock : Watkin Lloyd, Andrew ap Lewis, Ievan ap Richard, 
Jankyn ap Meurig ap Richard, Jankyn ap John ap Rhys, Philip ap Griffith 
Bras, Richard ap Rj^s, Meurig ap Rys, Richard Prys ( = 9 + 160, fourteen of 
whom were wounded). 

Of the above 5 + 54 were on the sick list at Harfleur. SeeExch. Accts. 
45/1. Hunter, 51. The West Wales men came from Gethinog, St Clear's, 
Llanstephan, Emlyn, Penryn (Pemb.), Tallagharn, Elvet, Wydegada, 
Trayne and Osterlo (Pemb.), Iskennin, Maenordeilo, Penarth (Cardigan), 
Hyrcoryn, Cayo, Isayron, Mabwynion, Caerwedros, Uwchcerdyn, Iscerdyn, 
Iswyle, Uchayron : and the men of Mid-Wales from Glyncawy, Cantrecelly, 
Hay, the Forest, Ystraffelte, Llywch, and Conwt. See Trans. Roy. Hist. 
Soc. 191 1, 135. Penryn and Osterlo are now in Carmarthenshire. 

6 Cal. French Rolls, 718. 

6 Sir William Stradling (temp. Richard II) had two sons, Sir Edward, 
and William. Edward married Jane, a daughter of Cardinal Beaufort. 
Their son was Sir Henry Stradling who married Elizabeth, a sister of 
William Herbert, earl of Pembroke. They had a son Thomas Stradling, 
and a daughter who married Miles ap Harry. The other son of Sir William 
Stradling had a daughter Gwenllian, by whom Anthony Woodville, earl 
Rivers, had a daughter Margaret. 

7 He was farmer of the lordship of Dynevor. 1433-52. West Wales 
Hist. Soc. Trans. 162-3. 



in] MATHEW GOUGH 45 

Gloucester ; Henry Wogan 1 with the duke of York ; John 
Griffith and John ap Thomas with Sir William Bourchier ; 
John Glyn and Nicholas Griffith with Lord Talbot ; John 
Edward 2 with Michael de la Pole, son of the earl of Suffolk ; 
Rees ap Rhydderch with Sir Rowland Lenthal of Hereford- 
shire ; John Lloyd 3 and John ap Rhys 4 of Carmarthen were 
with the king. Sir Rowland Lenthal subsequently became 
lord of Haverfordwest. 

Of these warriors none perhaps are so well known as 
David Gam, the ancestor of William Herbert, 

David Gam. 

earl of Pembroke. He was one of the few men 
of note who were slain at Agincourt 5 . There is extant a 
tradition that he was knighted as he lay expiring on the 
field of battle. There is no conclusive evidence that the story 
is true. But the anonymous priest who accompanied the 
expedition, and afterwards gave an account of it, makes 
a vague statement that two newly-made knights were 
included among the slain 6 . The only knight mentioned by 
him is Sir Richard Kighley, and it may be presumed that 
he had been knighted before. Now, if two of the three of 
inferior rank who were slain were knighted on the battle- 
field, we may reasonably suppose that David Gam was one, 
for he is given pride of place by every writer of the period. 
Our inference is strengthened by the fact that his son-in-law, 



1 Received protection July, 1415. Record Reports, 1885. Cal. French 
Rolls. 

2 Ibid. June 1, 1415. He received protection again on May 2, 1416, 
being then in the retinue of John ; earl of Huntingdon ; and again on 
February 5, 1416, in the retinue of Thomas Carew. Ibid. He was then 
designated " armiger." Rymer's Foedera IX. 249. 

3 Received protection May 22, 1415. Cal. French Rolls, in Record 
Reports, 1885. 545-637, passim. 

* Received protection, August 6, 1415 ; ibid. He is perhaps the 
John ap Rys given in Merbury's list. See ante. 

5 Nicholas, Agincourt, 369. Hardyng, note. 

6 The men of note slain were the duke of York, duke of Suffolk, 
Sir Richard Kighley, David Gam, esquire, Thomas FitzHenry and John de 
Peniton. The account referred to is British Museum, Cottonian MS. 
Julius E iv. and Sloane MS. 1776. See Nicholas, Agincourt, Intro, ix. and 
136-7. Also Had. MS. 782. 



46 WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS [ch. 

Sir William ap Thomas, was soon afterwards a favourite at 
court, and was knighted at the same time as Henry VI. 

The belief is fondly cherished that a number of other 
Welshmen were honoured with a knighthood on this historic 
field, notably Roger Vaughan of Bredwardine, Watkin 
Vaughan of Brecknock, and Watkin Lloyd of the same 
county. But we cannot escape a strong suspicion that 
these knighthoods have been fathered upon history by 
family pride. There certainly exists no reliable evidence. 
Indeed, Watkin Lloyd alone of the trio figures in the list 
of warriors 1 which has survived. 

On the death of Henry V the control of English affairs 
in France fell to the lot of the duke of Bedford who, during 
the first few years of the reign, wrested from the French 
practically all districts north of the Loire. Meanwhile, a 
large number of Welshmen had joined the standards and 
a few were already holding responsible positions as captains 
and commanders. 

One of these was Sir David Howel whom we have already 
had occasion to mention in connection with the conspiracy 
of the earl of Cambridge. He was a native of Pembroke- 
shire. He went abroad on the king's service in June, 1416, 
fought at Verneuil, and was a captain under the duke of 
Bedford in 1435 2 . Sometime afterwards we find him in 
the retinue of the duke of York, designated as a knight. 
The records do not reveal the time or the occasion of his 
knighthood. In the following year, 1438, he was associated 
with Sir William Pyrton 3 . 

Another who wrote his name in the annals of the time 
sir Richard and in the literature of the land of his birth was 
Gethin. g ir Ri c hard Gethin. He was a son of Rhys 

Gethin, a native of Builth, although one authority describes 

1 Nicholas ; Appendix, 60 ; and Dwnn's Visitations 1. 107, note. 
See the list of Brecknockshire squires above. 

2 Record Reports, 1885, 545-637 : William of Worcester's Itinerarium, 
161 ; Stephenson, Wars of the English in France, 11. 437. 

3 Record Reports, 1887', February-May, 1435-6; May-August 1437-8. 



in] MATHEW GOUGH 47 

him as of North Wales 1 . He fought at Crevant (1423) and 
at Verneuil (1424) 2 . After Verneuil he was made captain 
of St Cales, one of the towns captured by the earl of 
Salisbury 3 . He was also captain of Hiemes in 1424. In 
1428 he played a distinguished part at the siege of Orleans 
with the earl of Salisbury, and four years later was raised 
to the command of the important fortress of Mantes 4 , 
where, in 1433-4, he had under his command twenty-one 
mounted lances, twelve foot lances, and one hundred and 
forty-five archers. Guto'r Glyn commemorates in song his 
elevation to this post, and elsewhere mentions a rumour 
that he had been taken prisoner in Normandy 5 . The fact 
affords additional evidence of the frequent and reliable com- 
munications between the Welsh bards and their heroes abroad. 
Of the rest 6 a few played a prominent part in the later 
events of the period, notably Sir John Skydmore, and the 
Wogans of West Wales. Sir John Skydmore received 
protection to cross over to France with his son John, in the 
king's retinue, on April 8, 1422. He was retained, as we 
have seen, with ten lances and thirty archers for service at 
Harfleur 7 . Later (May, 1435-6) he was in the retinue of 
the duke of York 8 . Sir John Wogan was in the service 
of the duke of Clarence in 1418 9 . He held a commission 
to array the duke's troops in 1419 (August 9) 10 . In 1420 
he appears in the king's retinue 11 . Owen Tudor was in 
the retinue of Sir Walter Hungerford. 

1 Stephenson n. 436. The poet Guto'r Glyn is more reliable. See 
MSS. Cardiff, 2114/96. 

2 Stephenson, n. 394, 543. * Hall, 127. 

4 Quicherat, Procds, iv. 14, note 1 ; 17, note 2. Wavrin, 282. 

5 Guto'r Glyn, MS. Cardiff, op. cit. 8 See Appendix I. 

7 Ordinances of the Privy Council, Feb. 1422, 320. 

8 Appointed to take the muster of the Earl Marshal etc. at Dover, 
and of the duke of Exeter at London. May 28, 1423. Ordinances of the 
Privy Council, 100. 

9 Rymer, ix. 595. 10 Record Reports, 1885, 715, 314. 

11 On Nov. 18, 1419, he was appointed guardian of the lands of John 
Wogan, deceased, of Carmarthenshire, during the minority of the heir. 
Record Reports, 1880. A John Ogan received a commission to array the 
men of Gournay and Neaufle, March 27, 1420. Ibid. 1881. 



48 WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS [ch. 

None of his compatriots, however, and few of his con- 
Mathew temporaries, achieved the fame of Mathew 

Gough. Gough. The lustrous splendour of his deeds 

shone in almost solitary brilliance in those sunless days. 
The prominence given to him by the chroniclers of the 
Tudor period, from whom Shakespeare drew the material 
for his historical plays, is such that Gough may well have 
inspired the dramatist in the creation of Fluellen. A native 
of Maelor, in the lower valley of the Dee, he crossed to France 
in the enthusiasm of youth. His father was Owen Gough, 
bailiff of the manor of Hanmer, near Whitchurch, in North 
Wales. His mother was a daughter of David Hanmer, the 
nurse of John, Lord Talbot, afterwards earl of Shrewsbury. 
It is not unlikely, therefore, that Gough from the first came 
into close touch with that gallant soldier. 

His name first appears in the list of the principal person- 
ages who fought at Crevant and at Verneuil, where fell 
two of his countrymen, Richard ap Madoc and David Lloyd 1 . 
He may have joined the English forces in France with the 
levies of the Earl Marshal which were mustered by Sir John 
Skydmore in May, 1423 2 . This was the army which, rein- 
forced by some Burgundians, gave battle to the French at 
Crevant and routed them 3 . Gough distinguished himself in 
the pursuit and capture of the Bastard de la Baume, a brave 
Savoyard ally of the French. For this exploit the earl of 
Salisbury gave him " a goodly courser 4 ." After Verneuil 
we find him captain of some of the fortresses which had been 
taken by the earl of Salisbury. He then played a prominent 
part in the military operations which culminated in the 
reduction of Maine and Anjou 5 . 

In 1428 he was put in command of the important fortress 
of Laval, on the border between those two provinces, which 

1 Stephenson, 11. 385; Hall, 118, 121. William of Worcester, Itinera- 
rium, 357. 

2 Proceedings of the Privy Council, III. 66, 87, 101. 
s Wavrin, 47-69. * Hall, 121. 

6 Stephenson, 11. 411. Hall, 127. Issues, Easter, 1425. 



in] MATHEW GOUGH 49 

had been captured by Talbot in March of that year. At 
this period the most trivial incidents in his life are not 
allowed to pass unnoticed, an infallible symptom of growing 
popularity or accomplished fame. During the military 
operations in Maine in that year, he was sent out by Talbot 
to reconnoitre the enemy's position on the borders of Brittany. 
He set off in the dead of night, achieved his object by 
consummate tactics, and returned with complete information, 
having in the meantime " eaten only a little bread and drunk 
a little wine to comfort his stomach 1 ." 

In the same year he and his countryman, Richard 
Gethin, accompanied the earl of Salisbury in his advance on 
the Loire. On September 25, Salisbury captured the castle 
of Beaugency, and pursued his advantage by laying siege 
to Orleans. The relief of that fortress by Joan of Arc is 
one of the romantic chapters in French history. Beaugency 
had been placed in the keeping of Gough as Talbot's 
lieutenant, but the relief of Orleans seriously imperilled 
its safety. In June, 1429, it was completely surrounded 
by the triumphant Joan of Arc. Gough's position became 
precarious, and Talbot sent him an assurance that he would 
immediately be reinforced. 

Sir John Fastolf, realising the hopelessness of holding 
the place against such odds, although it was defended by 
" men of good stuff," advised the garrison to surrender 2 . 
The impetuous Talbot, however, resolved to challenge the 
supremacy of the French with a relieving force. But his 
army was soon in retreat, and Gough had no alternative 
but to sign articles of surrender. The French took pos- 
session on June 18, the garrison being allowed to carry out 
all their belongings. On hearing of this disaster, Talbot 
and the whole army retreated towards Patay where he 
was himself defeated and taken prisoner 3 . Gough then tried 

1 Hall, 138, 143. 

2 Wavrin, 287. " Gens de bonne estoffe." 

3 Ibid., 294. Monstrelet. Kail, 141. 



50 WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS [ch. 

to stem the French advance at Senlis ; and while he was 
there engaged, Laval was betrayed to the enemy by a neigh- 
bouring miller. 

The swelling tide of French advance rolled onward with 
Gougha resistless force towards the Norman frontier, 

prisoner. jfo e war n0 l on g e r provided material for heroism. 

It had become a dreary succession of sieges and the 
raising of sieges. After the loss of Laval, Gough en- 
deavoured to raise a bulwark of defence in Maine. For 
six weeks in the summer of 1432 he and Lord Willoughby 
pounded fruitlessly at the citadel of St Ceneri. At the end 
of that period, a French relieving force which offered 
battle near Vivain on the Sarthe, opposite Beaumont, 
was repulsed with considerable loss. On returning with 
their spoils and a number of prisoners Gough and Willoughby 
were unexpectedly attacked by another division of the 
French army under Ambrose Delore. Gough was taken 
prisoner, and the siege was abandoned in consequence 1 . 

Great was the distress in Wales when news of his captivity 
reached the circle of bards. Their solicitude found expression 
in a chorus of grief, panegyric and appeal. Ieuan Deulwyn 
soars to lofty heights of eulogy. Lewis Glyn Cothi sets him 
up as a standard of valour. Guto'r Glyn appeals for funds 
to ransom him. Gough was not long in captivity. He was 
redeemed, and it is not impossible that he may have found 
financial assistance in his native land 2 . 

During the next few years the records are all but silent 
with regard to his movements. When he does appear, he 
is in the vortex of the storm on the borders of Normandy 
and Maine ; now with Thomas Kyriel as captain of St Denis, 
a place which was yielded to the French in June, 1435 ; 

1 Wavrin, 46-50. Monstrelet, 1. 630. Hall, 165. Polydore Vergil 42. 

2 At St Denis Gough was taken "by founderyng of his horse." Hall, 
175. Polydore Vergil 79. 

Bu ar gler bryder a braw 

Ban ddaliwyd, beunydd wylaw. Guto'r Glyn. Hafod MS. 3. 
" The bards were disconsolate, and there was universal sorrow when 
Mathew Gough was taken prisoner." 



in] MATHEW GOUGH 51 

at another time as joint lieutenant of the important fortress 
of Le Mans, under Sir John Fastolf, governor of Anjou 
and Maine 1 . An official attestation of two indentures 
relative to the custody of this stronghold enumerates his 
personal bodyguard : sixty mounted lances, fourteen foot- 
lances, and two hundred and twenty-two archers 2 . 

Meanwhile, Joan of Arc, after the defeat of Talbot near 
Patay, had met with a series of glittering successes. But 
she failed in her assault on Paris and thereby lost prestige. 
In 1430 she escaped from the French court, was taken 
prisoner by the Burgundians, and in the following year 
burnt by the English at Rouen. In 1435, at the Congress 
of Arras, the English refused conditions of peace, and in 
consequence lost the alliance of Burgundy. In 1436 they 
were expelled from Paris. During the next fifteen years 
the interest of the war was concentrated in Normandy. 

In 1440 Gough assisted Somerset and Talbot in the 
reduction of Harfleur which had been captured by the 
French in 1435 . The French garrison made a gallant defence. 
A relieving force was despatched to raise the siege under 
Gaucourt, one of the most distinguished of those who took 
part in the reduction of Normandy. Gaucourt 3 was lagging 
behind when he was unexpectedly set upon by a body of 
Welshmen under Griffith Dwnn, and taken prisoner 4 . The 
reverse was such a severe blow to the garrison that they 
were immediately forced to surrender. 

In 1442 Gough was at Chartres, and was one of the 
commanders to whom a large sum was paid by Dunois 
touching the demolition of the two fortresses of Gallardon 

1 Wavrin, 66, 88-93. Fabyan 608. Hall, 185. Wavrin. 274. 

- Paston Letters, I. 37. September 30, 1435. 

8 Blondel, Rednctio Normaniae, 277, 287-8, 375. Wavrin, 28, 222, 276. 

4 Wavrin. 278-9. This was the Griffith Dwnn of the district of Kid- 
welly, who, as we have seen, was denizened in 1421. The names are given 
in Itinerarium, William of Worcester, 118-9. Homines lanceati Gryffith 
Don armiger apud capcionem domini Gaucourt : Johannes Mabbe de 
Kedwellylond, Johannes Whyte, Galfridus Doore, Geffrey Harrlete, 
Johannes Davy, Johannes ap Gryffyth, Howel ap Gryffyth, Davy f rater 
ejus, Jevan de Vawres (i.e. Ievan Vawr), Jevan Ragland. 



52 WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS [ch. 

and Tourville, the surrender of which had become the 
military necessity of a languishing cause 1 . 

English dominion in France now gasped fitfully to its 
close. The need for reinforcements and a directing genius 
had become an imperative necessity. Thus it was that in 
June, 1441, the duke of York, having been appointed Lieu- 
tenant and Governor-General of Normandy, sailed from 
Portsmouth. He landed at Harfleur, and marched through 
Rouen to take part with Sir John Talbot around Pontoise. 
Amongst those who constituted his retinue were Sir Walter 
Devereux and Sir John Skydmore, while Sir William ap 
Thomas of Raglan was a member of his military council 2 . 

Sir William ap Thomas was the father of William Herbert, 
sir wiiiiam afterwards earl of Pembroke. He was a courtier 
ap Thomas. an( j councillor rather than a warrior. We 
have no record of his having achieved military fame. 
The prowess of Mathew Gough was popularised in the odes 
of an enthusiastic bardic circle. A curious tale of a later 
day immortalised David ap Einon, the hero of Harlech. 
Sir William ap Thomas can claim neither the real glory of 
the one, nor the legendary renown of the other. 

Early in the century, his family had cast their lot with 
the English opposition to the rising of Owen Glyndwr. 
David Gam, Sir William's father-in-law, had carried his 
enmity to such lengths that he made an ignoble and malicious 
attempt to assassinate the Welsh leader, a dark project 
which almost succeeded. The renewal of the French war 
by Henry V opened out for him a more honourable field 
of enterprise which he and his immediate descendants 
turned to considerable advantage. In the course of years, 

1 Stephenson, 11. 331-2. 

2 He held one knight's fee in Raglan in 1425 from Edmund, earl of March. 
See Calendar Inquis. post mortem, 96, 141. Sir John Skydmore received 
letters of attorney on going abroad, in February, 1440— 1 ; and Richard 
Hore of Laugharne, Carmarthenshire, in February. Record Reports, 18S7. 

Sir William ap Thomas was infeoffed of Bassaleg, in Gwent, by the duke 
of York. For the close relationship which subsisted between them, see 
Proceedings (1441) 136-7. 



in] MATHEW GOUGH 53 

the family regained their esteem in the public opinion of 
Wales. Sir William ap Thomas was familiarly known as 
the " Blue Knight of Gwent," while his wife Gwladys was 
hailed as the lodestar of a new nationalism 1 . 

Authentic details of his career are few and unimportant. 
He served on a number of commissions in South Wales, 
which throw a lurid light on the flagitious piracy that 
infested the estuary of the Severn. In 1426 he was enrolled 
among the thirty-six young gentlemen who were knighted 
in honour of Henry VI's knighthood 2 . The prevailing 
opinion that he was knighted by Henry V for his valour 
in the wars of France is therefore erroneous 3 . It is con- 
ceivable that his path to honour was largely paved by the 
prowess of David Gam. We see no reason to refuse to 
identify him with the person of the same name and title 
who was sheriff of Glamorgan in 1440, a position which 
was held by his more distinguished son, William Herbert, 
some years later 4 . In 1450 he was joint ward of the lands 
of the countess of Warwick. This is apparently the last 
recorded notice of him in published records. 



1 Lewis Glyn Cothi, i. i. 3. Dwnn's Visitations, 1. 292-3. Proceedings, 
v. In 1420 he served on a commission in South Wales with Maurice ap 
Meurig, John ap Howel ap William, and John Dansey " to arrest Thomas 
Wykeham." Also on a commission concerning the acquisition by John 
Havard from William ap Thomas of the royal lordship of Talgarth. Also 
in 1432 with Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, " for the keeping of certain 
monasteries " ; also with Gloucester, Sir Edward Stradling, and Griffith 
Dwnn " for the custody of St John's, Carmarthen," 1432. Also with Strad- 
ling and others " to enquire as to the malefactors who took at sea a ship 
called Le George of Sluys laden with wines and honey of certain merchants 
of Flanders and Picardy, and brought her to Tenby, sold the ship 
and distributed the wines " (1432). Also, in 1434, with Stradling and 
Sir James Audley " to make inquisition concerning acts of piracy, the 
goods having been carried to Cornwall and Wales and disposed of." In 
1442 lie and a few others investigated treasonable proceedings in West 
Wales. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. 

2 Wardrobe Account, 1426, Q. R. Misc. Wardrobe. Hall, 138. Cal. 
Pat. Rolls. 

3 Collins, Peerage, in. 25 ; and Dwnn's Visitations, 1. 292, are both 
misleading. The list of knights in Rymer, x. 357, is incomplete. 

4 Clark, Glamorgan Charters, v. 1539, 1635-7, refuses to identify them 
on the ground that it would be below Sir William's dignity. We need 
only remark that a Neville was sheriff in 1450. Cardiff Records, v. 536. 



54 WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS [ch. 

To return to the war and Mathew Gough. In 1444, 
a truce was agreed upon at Tours between 
and the England and France to celebrate the betrothal 

MaTn". of Henry VI and Margaret of Anjou. One of 

the conditions of this marriage alliance was the 
cession to the French of Anjou and Maine. The duke of York 
endeavoured to reap personal advantage from the alliance 
by a projected betrothal of his own son to a French princess 1 ; 
and to enhance his prospects in that object he sent Gough 
to assist the dauphin in an expedition against the Swiss in 
Alsace 2 . 

The negotiations for the cession of Maine did not find 
Gough in any humour of acquiescence. His conduct on this 
occasion exhibited a tenacity as inflexible as his patriotism 
was fervid. It was a galling experience to so valiant a 
captain to be summoned meekly to transfer to his enemy 
a district through the conquest of which he had won for 
himself undying renown ; and it did not fail to reveal in 
him a resourcefulness worthy of a better cause 3 . He 
doubted the expediency of such a surrender. The glory of 
British arms had not shone brightly since Crevant and 
Verneuil, and he dreaded the pernicious effects of a diplo- 
matic check. Even Margaret, herself not devoid of com- 
bativeness, was captivated by his vigour and zeal 4 . 

The fateful promise to concede Maine was extorted from 
Somerset in 1444. It had not been fulfilled a year later, 
and the French began to press their demand. In December, 
1445, Henry signed an undertaking to surrender Le Mans 
and his possessions in Maine by the following April. Mean- 
while a truce was agreed upon. Gough was now captain 
of Bayeux 5 . 

1 Stephenson, i. 79-86, 160, 169. 

2 Escouchy, 1. 11 ; Vallet de Viriville, III. 47. 

3 Stephenson, 363-8. 

4 Letters of Margaret of Anjou, 109-10. In one of her letters to the 
earl of Northumberland, Margaret evinces much concern for the safety of 
Gough. 

5 Record Reports, 1887, sub ami. 1446. 



in] MATHEW GOUGH 55 

In July 1446 it appears that he was in England 1 , perhaps 
in connection with the surrender. In the following year the 
question had already assumed an exacting predominance. 
On July 28, 1447, he and Fulk Eyton were commissioned 
to receive Le Mans from the hands of the earl of Dorset 
(afterwards earl of Somerset) and deliver it to the repre- 
sentatives of Charles VII of France 2 . They were to use 
force if necessary. Gough adopted dilatory tactics and, far 
from appealing to the sword, did not even present his demand 
till September 23 s . When this was formally done, Osbern 
Mundeford, Dorset's lieutenant in Le Mans, refused to 
surrender on the technical ground that no letters of discharge 
were enclosed for him. 

On October 23, Henry VI wrote to Gough and Eyton : 
" We have been informed of the diligence which by our 
command you have done to have and recover unto our hands 
the town and castle of Le Mans 4 ." But if Henry and his 
advisers thus put a specious interpretation upon their 
conduct, the king of France was nettled by their arbitrary 
and fearless evasiveness. 

On November 1 a conference was held at Le Mans between 
the French and English representatives to discuss the 
question of compensation. Gough and Eyton, who were 
to have made the formal surrender, conveniently absented 
themselves, and the cession was again postponed. French 
authorities interpreted their conduct as deliberate shuffling. 
Charles wrote to Henry complaining of their delay and 
studied disobedience : " And seeing the subterfuges, pre- 
tences, and dissimulations to which they resorted, we sent 
our accredited messengers to your great Council at Rouen ; 
and, in consequence of the wrong, we have been moved to 
proceed against them 5 ." 

On December 30, the Count of Dunois extracted from 

1 Record Reports, 1887. He received letters of protection, July 5, 1446. 

2 Stephenson, n. 696-7. 3 Ibid. 693-8. 4 Ibid. 702. 
6 Stephenson, II. 361-5. Rymer, xi. 204, 216. 



56 WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS [CH. 

Gough a promise that he would surrender the town on 
January 15, 1448. Gough again prevaricated. Conse- 
quently Charles obtained from the English Council at Rouen 
an undertaking that if the province was not delivered into 
his hands by February 10, Gough would be held guilty of 
treason. The French were now prepared to enforce their 
demands at the point of the sword. On February 13, an 
army under the count of Dunois appeared before Le Mans. 
Gough was still stubborn, alleging that he awaited further 
orders from Adam Moleyns. On March 16, however, he 
yielded. He was allowed to march out with bag and baggage 
and substantial compensation. On the previous day he 
issued a protest in the king's name that the cession was 
only made in consideration of a secure peace, and that 
Henry did not resign the sovereignty of Maine 1 . Such 
a protest did not weigh a feather with the aggressive captains 
of France, but it revealed the bitter distress with which 
a born soldier accepted a rebuff of the making of others. 
It was sorry consolation to him that the Council issued a 
proclamation that he had done his duty as to the delivery 
of this rich province 2 . 

The disbanded garrison of Le Mans endeavoured to 
counterbalance this loss by establishing a new fortress at 
St James de Beuvron, in Brittany. Charles protested, and 
lengthy discussions followed. The question was still in the 
crucible of debate when the English sacked Fougeres. In 
the meantime Gough had tried to rescue Giles of Brittany, a 
loyal ally of England, who had been cast into prison when the 
duke of Brittany threw his influence on the side of the French 3 . 
Charles of France, resolved on the complete expulsion of 
the English from Normandy, suddenly put an end to this 
travesty of a peace, and in July active war once more began. 

1 Record Reports, 1884, 330. Mathew Gough signs his name " Matheu." 
Stephenson, 11. 333. 

2 Ibid. 1887, June 12, 1447-8. Stephenson, 11. 702-14. A John 
Morgan witnessed the surrender. 

3 Stephenson, I. 280. 



in] MATHEW GOUGH 57 

St James de Beuvron had been recaptured a few weeks 
previously, the garrison being allowed to leave 
becom™' with all their goods 1 . On the resumption of 

JjbTec'ts. hostilities the English strongholds submitted 

in rapid succession, among them La Roche 
Guyon, an almost impregnable fortress in central Normandy, 
situated on the Seine. Its captain was the Welshman, 
John Edward, who had so far advanced his personal fortunes 
that he had married a French woman of considerable 
property, and a relative of the powerful French count, 
Denis de Chailly. Perceiving that English dominion in 
France was nearing its close, and being anxious not to 
jeopardise his wife's property, Edward, with tender dis- 
cretion, became a vassal of the French king, and surrendered 
the fortress, " at the advice, prayer and entreaty of his 
wife, on condition that he should enjoy his wife's lands, 
and become a subject of king Charles 2 ." We may assume 
that he was the same person who fought at Agincourt in 
the retinue of the earl of Suffolk's son. There were doubtless 
many other Welshmen who now transferred their allegiance 
to the French king 3 . 

St Lo surrendered on September 15. Gough, who was 
Goughat at the time captain of Bayeux, was so in- 

Bayeux. censed at the conduct of the burgesses in 

admitting the French that he threatened to put their town 
and its suburbs to the flames 4 . Carentan submitted to 
the duke of Brittany on September 30. Gough shared the 
command of this fortress with his countryman, William 
Herbert. This, apparently, is the first, and one of the very 
few authentic notices we have of the latter in connection 
with French affairs 5 . 

1 Blondel, Reductio Normaniae, 76, 621. 

2 Blondel, 88-9, 277. Wavrin, 134. Stephenson, n. 621. 

3 Stephenson, 1. 31 1-3. An Ap Madoc was among the French men-at- 
arms in Normandy after the conclusion of the war. 

4 Blondel, 95. Hall, 214-16. 

5 Stephenson, n. 625. Herbert apparently crossed the Channel about 
1440. See later. 



58 WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS [ch. 

Meanwhile, the duke of Alen9on surrounded Belleme, of 
captain of which, too, Gough was captain and bailly. 

Beiieme. j ne g arr ison, numbering about two hundred 1 , 

seeing that resistance was futile unless reinforcements arrived, 
of which they had no hope, surrendered the town by 
composition. They were allowed to leave with their goods 
and chattels. This was November 20. Before the close 
of 1449, Renneville, the captain of which was " Griffith 
ap Meredith, Welshman," surrendered by composition 2 . 

Gough was now approaching the zenith of his splendid 
military career. His heroism flowed like an 

" Matago." 

electric current through those who served 
beneath him. To have passed unsinged through a furnace 
of hostile French criticism could not have been expected of 
a far less vigorous protagonist. Blondel, a contemporary 
writer, was especially inflamed against Gough. With him 
Gough's rigour spelt savagery, though he could not deny 
the stout hardihood with which he inspired his men. Wavrin 
makes the interesting admission that for years afterwards 
the name " Matago," a French contraction of " Mathew 
Gough," was fondly cherished by the inhabitants of Belleme 
in memory of their erstwhile captain 3 . 

On March 15, 1450, Sir Thomas Kyriel landed at Cher- 
Battieof bourg with reinforcements, and proceeded to 

carentan. j a y s j e g e t Valognes 4 . The duke of Somerset 

immediately sent him assistance under Sir Robert Vere, 
while Gough had to proceed from Bayeux, in command 
of about 800 men. Their combined efforts compelled the 
garrison to submit, on April 10, 1450 5 . The English forces 

1 "Droit bons combatans dont estoit capittaine Mathieu Gone," 
Wavrin, 150. " Ducentis enim barbaris sub Mathaeo Goth belligerantibus," 
Blondel, 156. Berry, 329. Stephenson, 11. 625-8. 

2 Stephenson, op. cit. 

3 "The name 'Matago' is to this day retained at Belleme in memory 
of this valiant Welshman," Wavrin, 150 ; and note, 282. 

4 Hugh Donne of Wales, in the retinue of the duke of Somerset, and 
John Hokes of Tenby, in the retinue of Henry, Lord Bourchier, received 
protection, Oct.-Nov. 1448-9. Record Reports, 1887. 

5 Blondel, 160. Berry, 331. Wavrin, 155. 



in] MATHEW GOUGH 59 

then set out in the direction of Bayeux. Along their line 
of march they had to ford the quicksands between the sea 
and Carentan, leaving this town on the right. The 
inhabitants of that place made a strenuous effort to cut 
off their rear, but Gough's irresistible dash swept them 
aside. " We have crossed in spite of the dogs," he exclaimed 
on reaching safety, and thereupon kissed the ground he 
had won 1 . 

They reached Formigny without further mishap, though 
the rapid concentration of French forces prevented any 
further general advance. Gough's contingent proceeded on 
its way to Bayeux, but were immediately recalled when it 
was seen that an engagement was imminent at Formigny. 
Here, on April 15, 1450, English domination in Normandy 
closed for ever. The French historian makes Gough address 
his troops on the eve of battle as follows : 

" Your valour, my brave men, has been steeled in many 
fires. Show how unconquerable it is in this 

Gough's 

speech at day's conflict. Vengeance, rather than courage, 

inspires your foes. Let strength of limb and 
intrepidity of heart win for you a glorious victory. If you 
play the lamb they will savagely cut your throats with 
blood-stained knives. Remember that your fathers, greatly 
outnumbered, vanquished countless hosts of Frenchmen. 
Your ranks are firm, and if you have the same indomitable 
spirit as they, you will scatter in headlong flight yonder 
disorderly and unbridled host. Flight on your part can 
only mean captivity or death. Seize the spoils of the 
Frenchmen ! See how they glitter effulgent in silver and 
gold ! Enrich yourselves abundantly, or embrace death 2 ." 
Thus does the French writer of those days conceive Gough 
to have been swayed by alternating moods of fear, doubt, 
hope, cupidity, and the memory of past glory. That the 

1 Blondel, 169. 

2 Berry, 333. Blondel, 171-2. The text is a free translation of the 
original. See Appendix II. 



60 WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS [ch. 

speech was put in the mouth of Gough rather than of Kyriel, 
the nominal leader, shows how the former had captured the 
imagination of his enemies. 

The day served to give additional proof of his courage. 
When the last gleam of hope of victory had 

William ° r jj 

Herbert a disappeared, he cut his way through the French 

lines at the head of the left wing, which con- 
sisted of about 1500 men, and reached Bayeux in safety. 
The bulk of the forces under Kyriel were either slaughtered 
in position or taken prisoners 1 . William Herbert and Kyriel 
were among the captured 2 . Gough himself all but fell into 
the hands of his enemy. He was rescued in a moment of 
extreme peril by his comrade and countryman, Gwilym 
Gwent, who was perhaps William Herbert ap Norman, a half- 
brother of William Herbert, afterwards earl of Pembroke 3 . 
The remaining English strongholds fell in rapid succession. 
On May 16, Gough surrendered Bayeux to the 
march to count of Dunois, "after severe assaults and 

skirmishes, the walls being pierced by great 
cannon 4 ." The pitiful sufferings of the garrison on their 
march to Cherbourg form one of the saddest episodes in 
this tale of disasters 5 . They were eight or nine hundred in 
number 6 , including the best and bravest of the English soldiers 
in Normandy. They were allowed a white staff for their 
weary way. There were about three hundred women besides 
children. Some of the latter were carried in little cradles 
on their mothers' heads ; others clung around their mothers' 

1 Blondel, 175. Wavrin, 153. 

2 Stephenson, 11. 630. Paston Letters, 1. 67-8 ; n. 147. 

3 Lewis Glyn Cothi, 1. viii, vn. 

Y vo gedwis ei vywyd 
I Vathew Goch vyth i gyd. 
" It was he who then saved the life of Mathew Gough." 
See also, William of Worcester, Itinerarium, 120-2, where this Herbert 
is described as " consanguineus domini Herbert locum tenens de Penigele." 
This " Penigele " is probably " Pengelly " in Breconshire. 

4 Stephenson, n. 630, 730. 

5 Stephenson, 1. 502. Hall, 216. The governor of Cherbourg in 1449 
was Sir John Gough. 

6 Ibid. 



in] MATHEW GOUGH 61 

necks. Some were led by the hand ; many had to shift 
as best they could. Moved by their wretched plight, com- 
passionate Frenchmen came to their assistance, some with 
horses, others with conveyances ; for many of the women 
were French born, and were now abandoning their country 
for a foreign land 1 . 

" What great booty dost thou, O Mathew Gough, thus 
ignominiously expelled from France, now carry to England ? 
Bereft of thy plunder, thou, a weary wayfarer, seekest thy 
home, wielding a slender staff, not a quivering lance. Thy 
miserable end is an example to tyrants, who always die in 
the midst of calamities 2 ." Such were the biting comments 
of the French contemporary historian. 

The remnants of the English forces gathered around 
Somerset at Caen after the defeat at Formigny. On June 24, 
that city capitulated 3 , and Somerset retired for a while to 
Calais. On August 12, Cherbourg, the last English foothold 
in Normandy, submitted to Charles of France. Sir John 
Gough refused to surrender without adequate compensation. 

To bring Gough's career to a close. After the fall of 
jack cades Bayeux he crossed immediately to England 
nsing - from Cherbourg. He was then placed in com- 

mand of the Tower of London with Lord Scales. Early 
in July he was called upon to defend the city against 
the insurgent Kentishmen under Jack Cade, "because he 
was of manhood and experience greatly renowned and 
noised 4 ." 

Cade's rebels entered the city on July 2. Three days 
later Gough issued forth by night at the head 

Death of ° J ° 

Mathew of a body of troops, dispersed the rioters, and 

attacked London Bridge, which was in the 

hands of Cade's men. The battle raged fiercely through 

1 Wavrin, 154-5. Berry, 342. 

2 Blondel, 212. See Appendix III. 

3 Polydore, 78. 

4 Hall, 221. In Lewis Glyn Cothi's ode to Gwilym Gwent [op. cit.) there 
are possible references to the engagement on London Bridge. 



62 WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS [ch. 

the night 1 , and many were hurled into the Thames to receive 
a watery grave in their heavy armour. Meanwhile, in the 
darkness lit up only by the blaze of burning houses, 
Mathew Gough was slain, fighting desperately to hold the 
bridge which he had succeeded in wresting from the men of 
Kent. He was honourably buried in the choir of St Mary's, 
of the Carmelite Friars. William of Worcester gave ex- 
pression to the grief in Wales on the death of the hero in 
a curious Latin couplet : 

On the death of Mathew Goch 

Wales, in deepest gloom, cried, Och ! 2 

" He was a man of great wit and much experience in 
feats of chivalry, the which in continual wars 

Contemporary _ J 

opinions had valiantly served the king and his father 

beyond the sea 3 ." Contemporary chroniclers 
unite in a chorus of praise and admiration. A native of a 
land of mountains and castles, he possessed in an eminent 
degree those qualities which make for success in a system of 
guerrilla warfare, in which the assault and defence of castles 
were the outstanding features. He warred in France for 
more than a quarter of a century ; and he was one of the 
very few who emerged from that cauldron of blundering, 
incapacity, waste and havoc, with a name resplendent with 
brilliant achievements 4 . 

Contemporary poetical allusions to him are numerous 
in the vernacular, and afford ample proof of his popu- 
larity in Wales, though, as far as we know, he never 
re -visited the land of his birth. Ieuan Deulwyn, Guto'r 
Glyn, and Lewis Glyn Cothi are unanimous in appraising 

1 Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 68, 151. Gregory, 103. 

2 Itinerarium, 357. 

Morte Matthei Goghe 
Cambria clamitavit, Oghe ! 

3 English Chronicle, edit. Davies, 67. Stephenson, 11. 768. Hall, 221-2. 
Polydore, 86. 

4 William of Worcester, Annales, 768. See also the will of Sir John 
Fastolf for a proof of his affection for Gough. Paston Letters, 1. 456. 
November 3, 1459. 



in] MATHEW GOUGH 63 

him as the most daring and successful soldier of his 
day. 

A number of Welshmen sought means at the conclusion 
of the war to defray their ransom. Edward Stradling and 
his family were given licence to ship wool to Brittany for 
this purpose ; Robert Dwnn traded with Normandy to defray 
Lord Falconberg's ransom. His vessel, the James of Tenby, 
whilst coming to England laden with wines from Bordeaux, 
was captured by the French near Winchelsea, which involved 
him in another journey to France. John Derell exported 
wool to ransom his son who was a hostage in France. Lewis 
Howel traded with Normandy through certain merchants 1 . 



APPENDIX I 

For a list of those who received protection see Calendar French 
Rolls in Record Reports 1885, 545-637, and Calendar Norman Rolls, 
Record Reports 1880, 1881. The following is a list of the Welshmen; 
the dates given in brackets are those on which they received pro- 
tection : Thomas ap Prene of Aberystwyth (March 23, 1418) ; 
David ap Rhys of Pencoed, Herefordshire, who was on a commission 
to redress infractions of the truce with Burgundy, June 2, 1418. 
He was in the retinue of Thomas Barre (Feb. 21, 1419) and with 
John, Lord Furnivale (June 2, 1421) ; John Hall of Wales, in 
Gloucester's retinue (May 15, 1421) ; John Henbury of Denbigh 
in Lord Scales's retinue (May 14, 1431) ; David Gronow of Tenby in 
Sir John Kyderowe's (May 28, 1421) ; Owen ap Thomas in the 
earl of Worcester's (June 8, 1421) ; various Welshmen (unnamed) 
in the king's and Lord Audley's retinues (July 6, 1417 and Feb. 16, 
1419) ; William Porter of Cardigan in John Popham's (Feb. 23, 1416) ; 
John Aylward of Kidwely in Henry Gwyn's (August 4, 1419) ; 
William ap Griffith of Iscennin, Carmarthenshire, in Sir John 
Steward's ; Meredith ap William ap Patrick of Carnwallon, Car- 
marthenshire, in Thomas Rempston's, who was captain of Meulan, 
Nov. 22, 1419 ; Henry ap Walter of Llanelly (Aug. 16, 1419) ; 
Henry ap Ieuan Gwynne in the king's (Oct. 18) ; Thomas ap David 
ap William of Wales, yeoman in Sir John Steward's retinue in 

1 For the above details see Record Reports, 1887, 387, 388, etc. Also 
French Rolls, 1459-61. 

Other Welsh ships mentioned are the Trinity of Newport and the 
Mary White of Tenby. 



64 WALES AND THE FRENCH WARS [ch. 

Normandy (June 26), who was then captain of Nully-L'eveque. 
In 141 8, Thomas Carew had a band of Welshmen in his retinue. 
Rymer ix. 596. During 1420-1 several commissions were issued 
to array Welsh archers. Sir Edward Stradling of Glamorgan received 
letters of attorney (May 24, 1426-7) ; Roger Cause of Tenby in 
Sir John Kighley's retinue (Dec. 8) ; Thomas Llywelyn in the 
earl of Ormond's (Mar. 13, 1429-30) ; Ithel Llywelyn of Flintshire 
and Hugh Penllyn in Lord Fitzwalter's (Feb. 1430-1) ; Lewis ap 
Rhys Gethin of South Wales in Walter Cressener's (Jan. 1437-8) ; 
Edward ap Howel assessor of taxes in Normandy (1430) ; Stephenson 
11. 130, also 299, 437 ; Thomas Griffith, in Bedford's retinue (1435) ; 
John Vaughan, in Bedford's retinue (May 1422-3) ; David, son of 
John Parker of Chirk, in John de Burgh's, captain of Vernon on the 
Seine (May 7, 1424-5) ; Thomas Toker of Tenby, merchant, in 
William FitzHenry's, captain of Honfleur (Dec. 12, 1422-4) ; William 
Wolf of Wales, knight, in Bedford's (1435), Stephenson 11. 433 ; 
Geoffrey Dwnn and William Vaughan of Cheshire (May 13, 1421, 
and May 1435-6) ; Gregory ap Heulyn of Denbigh, and Owen Dwnn 
in Lord Talbot's (Feb. 8, 1434-5) ; Ednyfed Vaughan of Anglesey 
(Jan. 1435-6) in the earl of Mortain's retinue; Thomas Gamage 
of Caldecot and Cardiff in the earl of Suffolk's (May 1435-6) ; Geoffrey 
ap Rhys accompanied the bishop of St David's to the Congress of 
Arras in 1435. Robert Lewis of Cardiff, alias Vaughan of London, 
in Somerset's retinue (1442-3, May- June) ; Henry Michael of 
Cardiff in the retinue of William Pyrton, lieutenant of Guisnes 
(Feb. 1, 1443-4) ; Stephenson 11. 331-2. Lewis ap Meredith was 
Marshal of Mantes in 1444, ibid. 1. 461 ; and in the special service of 
the queen. Letters of Margaret of Anjou, 116. 

APPENDIX II 

Virtus enim vestra, fortissimi viri, hodierno conflictu quanta 
sit in hostium pugnam variis periculis retro probata ostendet. Si 
virili animo et corpore robusto adversus istos plus vindictae calore 
quam virtute concitos dimicet, ab hostibus praeclaram victoriam 
reportabit. Si ignave, veluti pecorum hostes inhumani versa guttura 
cruentis mucronibus abscindent. Estote memores ut vestri patres 
cum paucis innumeram Gallorum multitudinem vicerunt et nunc 
multo plures si animi vigor insit istam effraenatam turbam sine 
ordine in vos ruentem maximam in fugam disperget, a qua fugax 
nullus strictam captionem aut subitam mortem evadere poterit. 
Nam vada jam mari cumulata Carentonium fugientibus viam 
praecludent. Fusis enim Gallis omnis vobis et posteritati vestrae 
comparata aniim praestantia perpetua nobilitatis insignia conse- 
quemini. Ditia Gallorum spolia, quae argento auroque praefulgere 



in] MATHEW GOUGH 65 

conspicitis, non mediocri sorte vestras fortunas augebunt, quae vos 
non ambigo consecuturos si animi praestantia in conflictu, veluti 
fortes proavi, in adversos pedem teneat fixum. 

Blondel, 171-2. 

APPENDIX III 

O Matthaeum Goth ! Spoliis agrorum et urbium raptu et 
tortura exactis tuas fortunas fecisti locupletissimas ; an ista affiicti 
populi oppressione cumulatas armis conservare potes ? Quid de 
tanta praeda nunc de Francia foede expulsus in Angliam defers ? 
Fractis enim corporis robore et animi virtute, armaturam, equos et 
quaecumque castrensia patriae direptione extorta victori Karolo, ut 
vitam a stricto gladio redimas compulsus cessisti ; et raptis omnibus 
exutus, non eques vibratam lanceam manu, sed tenuem stepitem ad 
tuos penates pedester portas. Pro sorte gloriae regni tui extollenda 
vincula, carceres, vulnera, et gravissimas labores, noctu diuque 
tolerasti. Pro tantis rebus angore gestis, tametsi exteriora fortunae 
caduca amisisti, saltern summum virtute praemium honorem con- 
secutus es, et labore tot periculis repetito tui principis gratiam et 
populi Anglici favorem habes, ut beneficiis pro remuneratione 
elargitis tuae calamitati condoleant. Tua enim foeda a bello Formi- 
niaco fuga sempiterna ignominiae sorde tuam famam, tui nominis 
aestimationem deturpavit. Et quia fugiens proeliorum ordines dis- 
solvisse accusaris (cujus occasione aiunt conflictum exitu sibi 
adversum et Gallis prosperum fuisse) et ob hoc tuo principi invisus 
et a populo implacabili furore concito reversus caede ferocissima 
necaris. In armis igitur perniciosus tibi, Mathaee, labor fuit, qui 
egestatem non divitias, qui dedecus non laudem, qui tandem 
crudele exitum non vitae securitatem attulit. Exitus vitae tuae 
miserrimus tyrannum semper emori calamitose ostendit. 

Blondel, 211-212. 



CHAPTER IV 

HERBERT AND TUDOR 

Of the luminaries who appeared in the political firmament 
during these stormy days of faction and war, 
none shone with a steadier light than Jasper 
Tudor. He was the son of Owen Tudor, an Anglesey 
gentleman who traced his descent from the old Welsh king, 
Cadwaladr. Owen was tall, handsome, and endowed with 
extraordinary charm of manner. He was also imbued with 
a lofty chivalry that continued to ennoble his life in spite 
of many hazardous vicissitudes during a period of fierce 
political convulsions, when chivalry degenerated into bruta- 
lity and selfish lust of power. 

It has been supposed that he was one of the band of 
hardy Welsh warriors who did service at Agincourt 1 . Reliable 
records, however, do not carry us back further than his 
appearance in the retinue of Hungerford late in the reign 
of Henry V 2 . He must soon have abandoned the fields of 
war for the alluring avenues of court life ; for during the 
infancy of the king he was at Windsor, in close attendance 
upon Queen Catherine and her child. 

It appears that Catherine might have married Edmund 
Beaufort, earl of Mortain (afterwards duke of 

His marriage v 

with Queen Somerset) , but for the opposition of Humphrey, 

duke of Gloucester, who saw in the proposal 

the dangerous ascendancy of the family of his rival, 

1 Stow. Strickland, Queens of England, II. 150, passim. 

2 See ante, Chapter 11. 



ch.iv] HERBERT AND TUDOR 67 

Cardinal Beaufort. Accordingly it was decreed by act of 
parliament, apparently about the year 1427-8, that a 
marriage with a Queen Dowager without a special per- 
mission should be illegal. But it could not have been 
many years after the death of Henry V before Catherine 
bestowed her affections upon Owen Tudor in bold defiance 
of parliamentary decrees and courtly traditions. They were 
married secretly. We need not suspect the validity of the 
marriage 1 , though we cannot trace any legal ceremony. 
During the proceedings instituted by the Privy Council 
against Owen there was no suggestion of illicit relations 
between him and the Queen Dowager. Nor was there any 
question raised as to the legitimacy of the children. In fact 
the legality of the marriage is tacitly admitted. However, 
when the relations between rival parties became more strained, 
Edmund and Jasper Tudor, who had then been raised to 
the earldoms of Richmond and Pembroke respectively, 
deemed it prudent to obtain a parliamentary ratification 
of their titles, and a formal declaration that they were the 
king's half-brothers. A technical illegality may, indeed, 
have been committed if, as has been generally supposed, 
the marriage took place about 1430. Intermarriage with 
Welshmen was contrary to law, and Owen did not receive 
denizenship till 1432. The date of this grant, and the un- 
usually stringent conditions attached to it, suggest that the 
marriage was known to a limited circle of courtiers who were 
not averse to shielding Owen while Catherine lived 2 . The 
statement of the London chronicler appears to corroborate 
this view 3 . 

1 Ramsay, Lancaster and York, i. 496, seems to cast doubt upon it. 
It is suggestive of the admitted legality of the marriage that not even 
Richard III, in his proclamation against Henry Tudor, attempts to dis- 
credit the marriage. 

2 Revenues from the following Welsh estates were assigned to Queen 
Catherine on the death of Henry V : Hawarden, Montgomery, Builth, 
Talybolion, Lleyn, Maltraeth, Menai, Cemmaes, Newburgh, Beaumaris, 
Aberfraw, Flint, Coleshill, Mostyn, Englefield, Caldecot, Newton. Rot. 
Pari. 1. Henry VI. 203. 

3 London Chronicle, 123. Stow, 377. 



68 HERBERT AND TUDOR [ch. 

Four children were born to Owen and Catherine, three 
sons and a daughter, " unwetyng the common people tyl 
that she were dead and buried " : Edmund of Hadham, 
who was afterwards created earl of Richmond and married 
Margaret Beaufort (their son was Henry VII) ; Jasper Tudor 
of Hatfield who became earl of Pembroke ; Thomas who 
was a monk at Westminster and " lived a small time " ; 
and a daughter Margaret, who died young 1 . Hadham and 
Hatfield were royal residences. Many stories have naturally 
gathered around the romance of Owen and Catherine. 
Among the tares of tradition must be assigned the tale 
that Owen on one occasion introduced to the queen a number 
of his compatriots whom she playfully described as the 
" goodliest dumb creatures she ever knew," on account of 
their ignorance of any language but Welsh 2 . 

Soon after the death of Catherine, in January, 1437, 
Owen Tudor was summoned before the Privy Council to 
answer for his conduct. He was then at Daventry, and 
refused to come without an assurance that he would be 
allowed " freely to come and freely to go 3 ." Though he 
received a verbal promise to this effect from the duke of 
Gloucester, he justly refused to admit the validity of it 
unless it were put in writing. Having thus incurred the 
danger of arrest, he came up to London and took sanctuary 
in Westminster. He remained there for some days, refusing 
to abandon his refuge, " eschewing to leave it although 
many persons out of friendship and fellowship stirred him 
to come out thereof and desport himself in a tavern at 
Westminster gate 4 ." Malicious representations were then 
circulated accusing him of disloyalty. In his eagerness to 
belie his traducers he came out of sanctuary and appeared 
before the council, where he protested that he had done 



1 Hall, 185. Miss Strickland gives the name Owen instead of Thomas. 

2 Wynne, History of the Gwydir Family. 

s Acts and Proceedings of the Privy Council, v. 46. 

4 Proceedings, V. 46-49. 



iv] HERBERT AND TUDOR 69 

nothing to give offence to the king, and offered to " byde 
the law " with reference to any charge brought against him. 
He was then permitted to retire to Wales. 

He was not allowed his liberty for long. In contravention 
Owen of the assurance which had been given him he 

imprisoned. was pi acec j U nder arrest, taken to London, and 
consigned to Newgate. The council, recognising that an 
unwarranted breach of faith had been committed, drew up 
a statement, as lame as it is laboured, to prove that the 
royal assurance had not been violated. The charge preferred 
against him was that he had married the Queen Dowager 
without the king's consent. It was stated that the under- 
taking given by him to answer any indictment involved the 
forfeiture of the royal promise of safe-conduct ; that at the 
time the promise was given neither the king nor Gloucester 
was aware of his hostile designs ; and that having already 
appeared before the council and been allowed to retire to 
Wales, he had forfeited the benefit of the assurance given 1 . 
The document is unconvincing. In February of the following 
year, Owen Tudor and his servant contrived to break out 
of Newgate " in the night at searching time through the 
help of his priest, and went his way, hurting foul his keeper 2 ." 
Having been recaptured by Lord Beaumont who was given 
a special grant of twenty marks for his expenses in the 
business 3 , he was once more summoned before the council. 
The priest was found to have £90 in his possession, which 
was confiscated to the Exchequer 4 . The priest 

His escape. *■ x 

was sent to Newgate, whither Owen Tudor also, 
after having been placed temporarily under the charge of 
the duke of Suffolk at Wallingford, was eventually removed. 



1 Proceedings, v. 46-50. Introduction, xvii. It appears from the Claus 
Rerum, 239, that he was at one time a prisoner " notabilis " in Windsor 
Castle. No date is assigned. 

2 London Chronicle, 123. " Fraudulenter et subtiliter." Rymer, x. 709. 

3 Rymer, x. 685-6. 

4 Rymer, x. 686, March 24, 16 Henry VI. Miss Strickland suggests 
that this may have been the priest who married Owen and Catherine. 



70 HERBERT AND TUDOR [ch. 

He contrived to elude his keepers once again and escaped to 
Wales, where, presumably, he remained till the outbreak 
of civil war 1 . He received a full pardon in November 

I439 2 - 

The intimate knowledge of Owen's misfortunes possessed 

by the swarthy bard of remote Anglesey, Robin Ddu, suggests 

that Owen repaired to his native land on his first release. 

In an angry lament, which internal evidence proves to have 

been written during Owen's captivity, the poet mourns his 

champion's confinement. " Neither a thief nor a robber, 

neither debtor nor traitor, he is the victim of unrighteous 

wrath. His only fault was to have won the affection of 

a princess of France." The bard further gives vent to his 

anxiety for the welfare of Owen's children in lines which 

show that the soul of chivalry had not departed from the 

hills, though courtly circles knew it no more. The ode also 

corroborates the assertion of the annalist Stow, that the 

attachment between Catherine and Owen began at a 

dance 3 . 

1 A formal pardon was granted to the sheriffs of London for their 
negligence in the matter. Cal. Pat. Rolls, July 29, 1438. Rymer x. 
709-10. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 344 General pardon to Owen Meredith for all offences. 

3 Robin Ddu. Ceinion Llenyddiaeth Gymreig. 217-8. 

Yr un dyn o'i rieni, 
Blodeuyn oedd blaid i ni, 
Sy' ngharchar, gyfar gofid, 
Yn Nghaerludd, anghywir lid. 
Gwae fi fod ym margod mur 
Yn eu tid, Owain Tudur. 

Nid am ddwyn march mewn ffrwyn ffraeth 
Yn Uedrad anllywodraeth ; 
Nid am ddyled ef am credir 

Y mae'n y rhest, y meinwr hir ; 
Ni bu leidr pan filiwyd, 

Na thraetur, llin Tudur Llwyd. 
Er iddo gynt, ar ddydd gwyl, 
Fwrw ei serch frowys archwyl 
Ar ferch brenin y gwindir 
Oedd yn hardd wiw addwyn hir. 
Duw a ro rhag cyffro cur 
Iddynt hoedl, wyrion Tudur ; 

Y mab y mae genym obaith 
A ddel cynt o ddwylo caith. 



iv] HERBERT AND TUDOR 71 

An entirely different, though hardly less romantic, tale 
of their early relations is given by the Welsh Tudor chro- 
nicler : 

" Now Catherine had been a widow for some years. 
The council forbade her to marry again, a pro- 
Griffith on hibition which she openly resented. At that 
Owen Tudors a me a S q U i re f Gwynedd, who was chief 

romance. * •> 

butler at court, conceived an attachment for 
the queen's maid of honour. One day in summer he and 
his friends were bathing in the stream which skirts 
the castle walls. The queen, observing them, saw that 
Owen — for that was the squire's name — surpassed the others 
in skill, and was more handsome of figure. Whereupon she 
turned to her maid and said, ' Yonder then is thy lover ? ' 
' In truth,' replied the maid, ' no sooner am I alone than 
he plagues me with his attentions.' ' Let me,' replied 
Catherine, ' take your place in disguise to-night, and he 
shall harass you no more.' 

" Now Owen and the maid used to meet on the gallery 
not far from the queen's chamber. Thither the queen 
made her way stealthily at nightfall. Owen had already 
arrived. Only a few words had passed between them when 
they saw a light approaching as though the queen, as Owen 
thought, was on her way to her chamber. The maid's 
demeanour was strange, he thought, and he began to suspect 
that he was being deceived. He would have kissed her lips ; 
but Catherine, who wished to conceal her face, struggled, 
and received a slight wound on her cheek. Meanwhile the 
light was coming nearer, and they parted. 

" Next day Catherine instructed her chamberlain to 
command Owen to serve her in person at dinner. Then 
it was that Owen discovered that the queen herself was 
the fair intruder, and he bent his head at the thought that 
he had wounded her. According to some, he would immedi- 
ately have returned to his native land ; according to others, 
the queen herself detained him at court, and having ascer- 



72 HERBERT AND TUDOR [ch. 

tained his descent from the old British kings, married him 
secretly 1 ." 

After the disgrace of Owen, his two sons were placed 
under the care of the abbess of Barking, Catherine de la Pole, 
sister of the earl of Suffolk, who occasionally complains of 
the non-payment of arrears that were due on their account 2 . 
The boys apparently remained there until 1440 3 . Although 
Catherine made no direct reference to the Tudors in her 
will, it is conceivable that her appeal to Henry VI to fulfil 
" her intent tenderly and favourably " had a direct bearing 
upon the lot of the unfortunate boys 4 . It is certain that 
he afterwards shadowed their education and welfare with 
a tenderness and solicitude which were perhaps the only 
gleams that played upon their early life. He placed them 
under the guardianship of " discreet persons to be brought 
up chastely and virtuously 5 ." 

Nor did the king, Henry VI, neglect their father, Owen 
Tudor. He allowed him an annuity of £40, " which for 
certain causes him moving he gave out of his privy purse 
by especial grace 6 ." The generosity of his royal half- 
brother was not lost upon Jasper, who served the dynasty 
of the Lancastrians in its hour of need with unflinching 
loyalty and exemplary devotion. The support which the 
Lancastrians found in Wales was due primarily to him. 
When his power waned, public opinion veered largely to 



1 History of Wales, Ellis Griffith MS. in the Mostyn Library. Ellis 
Griffith was a soldier in Calais. The above account is a summary trans- 
lation. (The original is given in the Appendix.) It should be observed 
that the History is unreliable in many details. For example, it states 
that Owen Tudor was put to death for marrying Catherine, that the marriage 
took place in 1425, and that Edmund Tudor and Jasper Tudor were raised 
to the peerage in 1436. 

2 Rymer, x. 828. 

3 In 1440, Catherine petitions the king to pay her the £$2. 12s. od. 
which is due to her for the upkeep of Edmund ap Meredith ap Tudor and 
Jasper ap Meredith ap Tudor, this amount being arrears since the last day 
of February, 17 Henry VI. Rymer, x. 828. 

4 The will is printed by Miss Strickland, vol. 11. 153. 

5 Ibid. 

6 Issue Rolls. Cal. Pat. Rolls. 



iv] HERBERT AND TUDOR 73 

William Herbert, who had meanwhile risen to eminence in 
the councils of Edward IV. 

William Herbert was one of the few men who left an 
wiiuam abiding impress on the history of his time. 

Herbert. Ljk: e Jasper Tudor he did not catch the ima- 

gination of contemporary writers except during the last 
few years of his life, for his work was more in secret than 
in the open. The ponderous tread of armies of retainers 
afforded a more effective means of publicity ; his was the 
silent voice of the inner council chamber. The eyes of 
generations of historians have been so dazzled by the glamour 
of a Warwick that they have failed to see in Herbert the 
forerunner of the Tudor ministers. It is agreed that the 
absolutism of the Tudors originated with Edward IV, but 
the part played by the ministers of that monarch has not 
been adequately appreciated. 

We need not inquire into the ancestry of William Herbert. 
His The task is the province of biography rather 

pedigree. than of history. The Welsh gentry of the six- 

teenth century, anxious that their family trees should appear 
to have their roots deep in the annals of old Wales or Norman 
England, forged pedigrees which gave many of them a 
spurious origin. The existing pedigree of William Herbert, 
which traces him back to the FitzHerberts of the twelfth 
century, cannot escape this taint of forgery. It is based 
on a manuscript which is supposed to have been in the 
possession of Lord Herbert of Cherbury, who nourished in 
the seventeenth century 1 . 

1 The curious may consult Dugdale's Baronage, II. 256. Jones, History 
of Brecknockshire, vol. II. pt ii. 440-51. Arch. Cambrensis, 3rd series, 
iv. 16-30. Hist. MSS. Commission, 8th Report, Ashburnham Collection, 
vol. via, 35 b, and 6th Report, 454 a. The story goes that when Herbert 
was made earl of Pembroke and installed at Windsor, Edward IV com- 
manded the earl and his brother Richard to take their surnames after their 
first progenitor Herbert Fitzroy, and to forego the Welsh method of 
retaining pedigrees ; and that the king under his first great seal com- 
missioned Ieuan ap Rhydderch ap Ieuan Lloyd of Gogerddan, Cardigan- 
shire, to summon the bards to Pembroke, and to certify the lineage of 
Herbert and his brother. "Thereupon the above Ieuan ap Rhydderch, 



74 HERBERT AND TUDOR [ch. 

He was the son of Sir William ap Thomas and Gwladys, 
the daughter of David Gam 1 ; and it is purely a matter of 
conjecture why the children were given the name of Herbert. 
It is possible that they wished to avoid the cloud of 
suspicion which enveloped their countrymen after the 
cataclysm of Glyndwr's wars. A Welsh name had a foreign 
sound, and was to many suggestive of rebellion. The 
family had been vigorous and aggressive in their hostility 
to the Welsh leader, and had in consequence been anathe- 
matised by their countrymen. It was therefore a stroke 
of discretion to enter into a wider and more remunerative 
field of activity than Wales could afford, and to parade an 
English name. 

Sir William ap Thomas must have spent much of his 
His interest time in London. His eldest son Thomas, 
m commerce. w ^o fig ure d prominently among the followers 
of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, first appears as " Thomas 
Herbert of Greenwich " ; while William is introduced on 
the stage of history as " William Herbert of London, chap- 
man." This epithet suggests — and the fact is corroborated 
by the contemporary Welsh poet Howel Swrdwal, — that 
the Herberts entered into those commercial activities which 
did much to undermine the ascendancy of the feudal nobility, 
and to lay the foundations of the new. It was in 1440 that 
William Herbert received the epithet " chapman 2 ." The 

Howel Swrdwal, Ieuan Deulwyn, and Ieuan Brechva, having traced the 
pedigree, presented to their majesty their certificate in Welsh, Latin, 
English, and French, which stated that Herbert was descended from 
Peter Fitzherbert in the reign of king John, and from Herbert, son of 
Godwin, son of Elfrid, who had married a sister of Earls Harold and Tostig. 
Dated Aug. 12, 1460." Of course the earldom was not conferred upon 
Herbert till 1468. He never was named Welsh fashion even before 1460. 
There is no such commission upon the Patent, Close, or Exchequer Rolls. 
See also Catalogue Welsh MSS., British Museum. 

1 Lewis Glyn Cothi and other poets. The editor identified " y Gwindy 
Gwyn " of one of Glyn Cothi's poems as the London residence of Sir 
William ap Thomas, but gives no authority, 1. xviii. There was a house 
in London called le Herbert, but apparently it did not belong to the 
family. Rymer, 1461, 473. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, Feb. 2, 1440, 374. Record Reports, 1887. Dec. 26. 
John Stradling of Glamorgan was also in Kyriel's retinue at this time. 



iv] HERBERT AND TUDOR 75 

protection which he had received two months before "as going 
to Calais, there to abide in the company of Thomas Kyriel, 
knight, lieutenant of the town, and engage in victualling the 
same " was revoked, because he tarried in the city of London 
and its suburbs. This was the time when the duke of York 
and Sir William ap Thomas went over to Normandy. A few 
years later we find him engaged in importing Gascon wines 
into the port of Bristol 1 . Moreover, the Herberts, in 1462, 
were in command of certain vessels for the defence of Bristol 
and other ports in the west against the Lancastrians 2 . 

We cannot be certain whether William Herbert accom- 
Herbertin panied York on his expedition in 1440, or 

Normandy. whether he joined Kyriel in Calais, and we 
need not attempt to erect an aerial fabric of assump- 
tions. He is lost to view for some years. When he 
reappears towards the close of the Hundred Years War, 
when the French were following hard upon the track of the 
retreating English, he was under the vigilant eye of his 
distinguished countryman, Mathew Gough, as joint-captain 
of Carentan, in 1449 3 . 

1 Pat. Rolls, May 22, 1457, 353. On Oct. 10, 1457-8 protection 
was given to his brother " Thomas Herbert of Troye, Wales " in the king's 
service on the high seas. William of Worcester, Itinerarium, identifies 
him with Thomas of Greenwich. Record Reports. 

Howel Swrdwal refers to Herbert's commercial enterprise in the lines : 
Dau lu ami dal o iwmynn 
Dwy long yn dyfod ai lynn. 
" He has two armies of tall yeomen, and two ships trading in wines." 
Swrdwal's poems have recently been published by the Bangor Welsh MSS. 
Society. The poem from which the above lines are taken is dated 1450. 
This is impossible. There are references to Edward of York, which could 
not apply at least before 1461. There are indications that it may have 
been written just before Mortimer's Cross. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, March 1, 1462. Perhaps it should be stated that 
the name is variously spelt as Herbert, Herberd, Herbard, and even Here- 
bard, though Herberd is more common at first. It is not easy to distinguish 
the many Herberts of contemporary records. A William Herbert of 
Gloucester kept Newport Castle in 1468-9. A Thomas Herbert of Glou- 
cester was constable there in 1468-9, sheriff of Somerset 1468, High Bailiff 
of Guisnes 1468. There was another of the name in Salop and Staffordshire 
(1443), while Thomas, Gilbert and William Harbard of Strood supported 
Cade in 1450. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. 

3 William of Worcester, Itinerarium, 122, as we have seen, mentions a 
William Herbert ap Norman who fought under Mathew Gough in France, 
and describes him as "locum tenens de Penigele." Elsewhere, ibid. 120, 



76 HERBERT AND TUDOR [ch. 

From this circumstance it may safely be inferred that 
he had been in Normandy for some time 1 . After the reverse 
at Carentan he may have served with Gough at Fougeres 
and Belleme. He was taken prisoner at Formigny. For 
this reason he probably did not return to England until 
the remnants of the English army crossed the Channel under 
Somerset, in September, 1450. Henceforth we must follow 
his course in the main stream of political life. 

On the expiration of the duke of York's term as lieutenant 
The duke of °^ France, in 1445, Dorset, who soon after- 
York, and wards was raised to the dukedom of Somerset, 

Somerset. 

was appointed to succeed him. York was 
made lieutenant of Ireland for 10 years, a specious form 
of exile. Certain individuals were appointed to seize and 
imprison him at Conway on his way to his new post in 1447, 
Sir John Talbot at Holt Castle, Sir Thomas Stanley in 
Cheshire, and one Richard " groom of our chamber " at 
Beaumaris. Sir Walter Devereux also was to be arrested. 
Nothing untoward happened 2 . Meanwhile the government 
of Margaret and Suffolk went from bad to worse. The 
popular opposition to them culminated in the banishment 
and death of Suffolk in 1450. Events then rushed onwards 
with perilous foreboding. Jack Cade raised the Kentishmen 
with temporary success, and was killed in a scuffle in July. 
In the confusion the duke of York abandoned his post with 
the avowed object of reforming the ministry, and landed 
in Beaumaris in August 3 . The duke of Somerset, who had 
succeeded Suffolk as leader of the court party, was summoned 
from Calais to deal with him, and was made constable of 
England in September 4 . This grant further inflamed public 
resentment against the queen and her friends. 

he is called " Willelmus Norman consanguineus domini Herbert." He 
fought at Banbury. Ibid. 

1 He may have accompanied Gough. See ch. m. 

2 See the duke of York's letter to Henry VI, printed in Paston Letters, 
Introduction ; and also in Holinshed. 

3 Ibid. Also William of Worcester, Annates, II. 769. Hall, 225. 

4 Rymer's Foedera, XI. 276. 



iv] HERBERT AND TUDOR 77 

Instructions had been issued to Henry Norris, deputy to 
the chamberlain of North Wales (Sir Thomas Stanley), 
Bartholomew Bold, who had succeeded John Norris as 
Captain of Conway in 1441 1 , William Bulkeley, who was 
a sergeant-at-arms in Anglesey and may have held some 
office at Beaumaris 2 , and a few others, to arrest the progress 
of the duke of York on his return, and prevent his entry 
into Chester, Shrewsbury and the border towns. But York 
once again eluded their vigilance, reached his estates in the 
Marches of Wales, collected a strong body of followers and 
reached London safely 3 . 

However, there was bloodshed. Sir William Tresham, 
Speaker of the House of Commons in the parliament of Bury, 
and one of York's most prominent supporters, was hastening 
to join his leader when he collided with the retainers of 
Lord Grey of Ruthin near Moulton, in Northamptonshire. 
Tresham was murdered 4 . In Wales, at least, the name of 
Grey of Ruthin was already synonymous with perfidy. There 
is hardly a more revolting figure in the annals of the war. 

Parliament met in November, William Oldhall, formerly 
a colleague of Sir William ap Thomas on the duke of York's 
council in Normandy, being chosen Speaker. Violent scenes 
took place between Somerset and York, the latter having the 
House of Commons on his side, the former relying on his 
supremacy at court. York subsequently retired to Ludlow 5 . 
Early in September an attempt was made to arrest Somerset 
at Blackfriars. It proved futile, and Somerset remained at 
the wheel during the Christmas adjournment. 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 497. He had eight soldiers. November 21, 1441. 
* Ibid. 129, August 16, 1448. He succeeded one Meredith ap Cynwric. 

3 The garrison of Beaumaris Castle was increased to twelve in 1446, 
and to twenty-one in the following May. This was probably the garrison 
till 1460. The constable was William Beauchamp. The author of 
Calendars of Givynedd gives no authority for making Bulkeley constable of 
Beaumaris in 1440. Beauchamp was followed by John Butler in 1460, 
who was supplanted by William Hastings on the accession of Edward IV. 
In 145 1 an annual sum of £20 was allowed out of the issues of the borough 
for four years for repairs. Minister's Accounts, in Medieval Boroughs of 
Snowdonia. Hall, 226. Paston Letters, op. cit. C.P.R. 1439; 301, 308. 

4 William of Worcester, Annates, 769. 6 Hall, 226. 



78 HERBERT AND TUDOR [ch. 

This fact is of importance ; for it shows that the flash 
of Athenian acuteness which illumined the 
attitude S recess emanated apparently from the favourite. 

someraet We re * er to ^ e nonours conferred during the 

Christmas festival at Greenwich. The king's 
half-brothers, Edmund and Jasper Tudor, two sons of the 
earl of Salisbury, viz. Thomas and John Neville, and 
William Herbert, were knighted 1 . It has hitherto been 
supposed that Herbert was knighted at Christmas 1449. 
This is an impossible date ; for, apart from the fact that 
Herbert was then in Normandy, authorities are clear in their 
assertion that the knighthoods were bestowed after the 
return of York from Ireland and Somerset from Calais. 
Except perhaps the Tudors, these were men whose sympathies 
were presumably with the duke of York. In conferring 
favours upon them the court party may have hoped to 
detach the Nevilles and Herbert from their friendship with 
the duke, and thus to weaken his influence at a most vital 
point, viz., the Marches. The position in South-east Wales 
was as follows : In 1449 Richard, earl of Warwick, had 
become possessed of the rich lordship of Glamorgan and 
Morgannwg 2 . The numerous ramifications of the families 
of Herbert and Roger Vaughan dominated Raglan and the 
surrounding district. Monmouth was part of the Lancas- 
trian heritage 3 . Abergavenny was held by a Neville in the 
person of Edward Neville, son of Ralph, first earl of West- 
morland 4 . Humphrey Stafford, duke of Buckingham, was 

1 " Festum natalis Domini rex tenuit apud Grenwych, ubi fecit duos 
fratres uterinos milites et comites, viz. Edmundum Richemund et Jasper 
Penbroch, ac Thomam et Johannem Nevyle, filios comitis Sarum, ac etiam 
Wyllelmum Herberd, Roger Leuconer et Wyllelmum Catysby, milites." 
William of Worcester, Annates, 11. 770. (The Dictionary of National 
Biography, Doyle's Baronage etc., sub William Herbert, are misleading.) 

It will also be noted that William of Worcester asserts that the king's 
half-brothers were made earls on this occasion. This piece of evidence 
has been discarded on the ground that Edmund's charter is dated Nov. 23, 
1452. Vide later. 

2 See table on page 100, note 3, showing how Glamorgan came into 
Warwick's possession. 

3 It was annexed to the earldom of Lancaster by Henry IV. 

4 He was summoned to parliament as Baron Bergavenny (Sept. 5, 1450) 



iv] HERBERT AND TUDOR 79 

lord of Brecknock and Newport, and an adherent of the 
House of Lancaster 1 . The Mortimer estates of the duke of 
York lay to the north, stretching roughly from Builth to 
Denbigh and including Builth, Clifford, Ewyas Lacy, 
Maeliennydd, Radnor, and Denbigh, with Ludlow as their 
centre, and at times Montgomery 2 . 

The court party realised that these estates, extending 
in an almost unbroken phalanx from Cardiff to Chester, 
would, if united under the duke of York, constitute a very 
serious danger. For, apart from the personnel of the 
leaders, these March lordships harboured a restless population 
whose chief occupation was petty warfare. On the other 
hand, if Somerset could retain the allegiance of the Nevilles 
and Herbert, the Marches would be divided almost equally 
into two opposing camps. This circumstance will serve to 
explain also the unusual activity of Margaret on the borders 
of Wales during the next five years. 

The duke of York did not remain idle. When the feud 

York's between the earl of Devon and Lord Bonville 

wwe? in broke out in the west in 1451, he took Herbert 

with him to settle the dispute 3 , though the 

importance of this association need not be over-estimated, 

in right of his wife, Elizabeth Beauchamp, daughter and heiress of Richard, 
earl of Worcester. 

1 Humphrey de Bohun, earl of Hereford, left two daughters, Eleanor 
and Mary. Mary de Bohun married Henry IV, so that her portion of the 
estates, which were in Herefordshire and Monmouth, was annexed to the 
Crown. Eleanor de Bohun was married to Thomas of Woodstock, duke of 
Gloucester (d. 1397). They had a daughter, Anne, who married Edmund 
Stafford, killed at Shrewsbury, 1403. Anne received from Henry VI the 
lordship of Brecon and the patronage of Llanthony Abbey for her and 
her son. Their son was Humphrey Stafford, lord of Brecon, created 
duke of Buckingham in 1444. He was killed at Northampton in 1460. 
He was married to Anne Neville, daughter of Ralph, first earl of West- 
morland. Their son was Humphrey Stafford, who was killed at St Albans 
in 1455. His wife was Margaret Beaufort, daughter of Edmund, first duke 
of Somerset. Their son was Henry Stafford, duke of Buckingham and 
lord of Brecon. He married Catherine Woodville, lived in retirement at 
Brecon during Edward IVs reign, and was executed in 1483. 

2 He gave charters to Ceri and Cedewain from Montgomery in August, 
25 Henry VI. Collections of Powys Club, vol. It. 388. 

3 William of Worcester, Annates II. 770. Chronicle of the White Rose. 
Bonville was besieged in Taunton. 



80 HERBERT AND TUDOR [chl 

inasmuch as the duty of suppressing riots in the west 
would naturally devolve upon the lords of those parts. 
In the winter of 145 1-2 York's designs assumed a 
more menacing aspect. From Ludlow he issued a mani- 
festo to the burgesses of Shrewsbury denouncing Somerset, 
and proclaiming his intention of marching on London to 
destroy him 1 . Having collected an army in the Marches 2 
he advanced on the capital. He found less encouragement 
than he had anticipated from the citizens, and was placed 
under arrest. Soon he was released and pardoned. His 
release is said to have been due to the rumour that another 
force was being mustered in Wales under his son, Edward, 
earl of March 3 . In the summer of 1452 the court party 
began their activities in the Marches. In July the king, 
accompanied by the queen and Somerset, went on a progress 
through the west, visiting Gloucester, Ross and Monmouth, 
in order to strengthen the fibres of loyalty and punish the 
guilty 4 . Walter Devereux of Weobley in Herefordshire, who 
was sheriff of that county in 1447, and some others were 
indicted for treasonable acts committed in the previous 
February. Bearing in mind that this was the month in 
which the duke of York issued his manifesto to the burgesses 
of Shrewsbury, the charge in all probability referred to the 
active participation of Devereux with York. Devereux was 
arraigned before justices Audley and Yelverton, but obtained 
the benefit of the act of grace pardoning all who had abetted 
York on that occasion 5 . 

In October a general pardon was granted also to " William 
Herbert of Ragland, in South Wales, of all offences before 
August 8 last, and any subsequent outlawries and for- 



1 Ellis, Letters, ist series, I. 11-13, dated Feb. 3, 1452. 

2 Hall, 226. We seem to have no reliable means of estimating the 
numbers of troops raised during these wars. 

3 Hall, 226 ; Fabyan, 626-7. 

4 Privy Seals and Wardrobe Accounts. 

6 The pardon was subsequently confirmed in the parliament which met 
immediately after the first battle of St Albans, 1455. Rot. Pari. v. 



ivl HERBERT AND TUDOR 81 

feitures 1 " ; and shortly before to Owen ap Griffith, the 
son of Griffith ap Nicholas, and Philip ap Rees, " for tres- 
passes against the statute of liveries 2 ." These were also the 
outcome of the king's visit, and may reasonably be regarded 
as part of a deliberate plan to conciliate the minor gentry 
Herbert and undermine the predominant influence of the 

implicated. duke of Yor k. Whether these had shared in 
York's immature enterprise the previous winter is a matter 
of conjecture. There is a strong presumption that William 
Herbert was implicated. We have seen that he accompanied 
York to the west in the previous year. He was also on terms 
of intimacy with Devereux. Moreover, there is extant a 
proclamation against him in which he is denounced as 
a notable rebel and forbidding any to give him encouragement 
or support. The proclamation is undated ; but as this 
appears to have been the only occasion on which he was 
thus circumstanced, the reference is doubtless to his associa- 
tion with York 3 . 

Further to strengthen and consolidate South Wales in 
the interest of the Crown, the kins: conferred 

Jasper Tudor ° 

made eari the earldom of Pembroke upon his half-brother 

Jasper Tudor, Edmund at the same time receiv- 
ing the earldom of Richmond 4 . Their titles and legitimacy 
were confirmed in the parliament which met at Reading, 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 1452-1461, 17. Dated Oct. io, 1452. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, Sept. 30, 1452, 17. It appears that the earl of 
Warwick was at Cardiff on October 31, 1452. Clark, Glamorgan Charters, 
1632. 

3 " Rex Vicecomiti London — nos nuper per considerantes quae et 
quanta mala gravamina Willus Herberd, miles ligeis et subgitis uris in 
diversis partibus fecit et perpetravit per vobis precepimus quod statim 
post receptam in singulis locis infra civitatem, praedictam et suburbia 
ejusdem publice proclamari faciatis. 

Ne quis prefato Willo aliquod receptamentum aut auxilium praebit — 
sed ipsum Willum tanquam notabilem rebellem ab orani gratia nostra — 
privatum fore et exemptum habeat et reputat." Clans Rerum, 300. 

4 As has already been stated William of Worcester gives an earlier 
date. But the date of Edmund's charter is Nov. 23, 1452, and the two 
may have been ennobled at the same time. Jasper's creation appears 
under a parliamentary ratification of both titles on March 6, 1453. See 
Paston Letters, II. 285. Rot. Pari. 250. 

E. W. R. 6 



82 HERBERT AND TUDOR [ch. 

March 6, 1453 l . In this declaration the name of their 
father, Owen Tudor, is significantly omitted, although there 
is a veiled reference to the fact that some of their ancestors 
were not English born, and to the disability under which 
they might have laboured as Welshmen 2 , disabilities which 
perhaps occasioned this strange declaration. It states that 
the king confers these grants upon his half-brothers of his 
own free will, and not at the instance of any other person. 
They were to take precedence of all other earls 3 . 

It is important to observe that the earldom of Pembroke 
was given to Jasper in spite of Margaret's having hitherto 
enjoyed the issues thereof 4 . The important castles of 
Pembroke, Tenby, Cilgerran, and Llanstephan were now 
therefore in Jasper's hands 5 . 

Henceforth he took an active part in the deliberations 
of the Government. In this parliament he introduced a bill 
into the Lower House asking, among other things, for a grant 
of the priory of St Nicholas at Pembroke. Intercession was 
made in favour of the monks of St Albans to whom a 
previous grant had been made by Humphrey, duke of 
Gloucester, and a provision was inserted in the bill saving 
the rights of the monastery 6 . When parliament rose for 



1 " Quod Edmundus et Jasper declarentur vestri fratres uterini in 
legitimo matrimonio infra regnum vestrum predictum procreati et nati 
ac indigine regni vestri supradicti et nedum sic declarentur verum etiam 
sic auctoritate supradicta realiter et in facto existant." Rot. Pari. 250. 

2 Rot. Pari. 251-3. 

3 " motu proprio non ad ipsius vel alterius pro eo nobis super hoc 
oblate petitionis instantiam sed de nostra mera liberalitate in comitem 
Pembrochie prefecimus." Ibid. 

* " non obstante jure titulo et interesse Margarete Regine Anglic 
precarissime consortis vestre, si que habeat in eisdem." Ibid. 

6 Included in the lordship and members of Pembroke were, " Pembroke, 
Castle Martin, St Florence, Coedraeth, Tenby, Roos, Kemmaes, Burton, 
Milford, Cilgerran, Emlyn, Llanstephan, Dyffryn Brian, St Clear's," etc. 
Rot. Pari. 253. 

6 Wethamstede, 1. 92-93. Jasper is described as " vir illustris frater 
regis ex parte matris qui de novo per ipsum regem in comitem Pembrochiae 
erectus." The chronicler remarks on the incident " a friend at court is 
often better than a fig on a plate, or a penny in a purse." It will be observed 
that the quotation suggests the " recent " creation of Jasper as earl of 
Pembroke. 



iv] HERBERT AND TUDOR 83 

the Easter recess the Tudors kept in close touch with the 
king. One of them was at Norwich on April 20, 1453 1 , and 
in communication with the Pastons. 

Meanwhile the Government became alive to the need of 
stringent supervision in Wales. Sir Thomas 

Government . 

activity in Stanley, chamberlain of North Wales, was 

Wales 

commissioned to compel the payment of arrears 
of debts and revenues from Merionethshire, Carnarvonshire, 
and Anglesey 2 , and to make inquisition in those counties 
touching trespasses, services, and customs concealed from 
the king, officers negligent of their duties etc. 3 Cymmer 
Abbey was committed to the charge of the duke of Somerset, 
and Ellis ap Griffith ap Einon, which abbey " was endowed 
to the sum of £60 a year, though now the endowment does 
not exceed the value of 20 marks a year ; and the abbey, 
through dissensions between certain lords of the marches 
there, has suffered distraints at the hands of persons on 
either side and abductions of goods and chatties so that 
no ministers thereof dare occupy the lands of old collated 
to the abbey 4 ." 

During the year 1453 the court party made renewed 
sir waiter efforts to strengthen their hold on Wales. 

Sir Walter Devereux had risked his life in 
the cause of York when the latter passed over to Ireland. 
In spite of this he was now favourably entertained by 
Margaret and Somerset. In March he was allowed to 
enter into possession of his wife's lands ; in May he was 
given a moiety of the castle and lordship of Narberth ; 
in December he was commissioned to make inquisition in 
Herefordshire touching all escapes of prisoners. Jasper 
Tudor received in addition to numerous grants in Warwick- 
shire, Herefordshire, Lincolnshire, Surrey and elsewhere, 
the confiscated lands of William Oldhall who was accused 

1 Paston Letters, i. 253-4, an d n °te t° letter 187. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls (1452-1461) 124. Aug. 12, 1453. 

3 Ibid. 173. Sept. 12, 1453. 

4 Ibid. 65. March 4, 1453. 

6—2 



84 HERBERT AND TUDOR [ch. 

of treason, and a fee farm of £113. 6s. 8^., paid by the heirs 

of Roger Mortimer for the castle of Builth, and of £42 of 

the farm of Hereford, paid by the citizens 1 , as well as the 

lordship of Magor, in South Wales 2 . 

Jasper Tudor had not as yet definitely associated himself 

with Margaret and Somerset. He was con- 
jasper Tudor ,,.,.., ... 

and the duke stantly at the king s side, and it is a tribute 
to the genuineness of the duke of York's 
protestations of loyalty that Jasper Tudor inclined to 
his side during this period of uncertainty and suspense. 
While York had no deeper purpose than the deposition 
of Somerset, he could, apparently, rely on the half- 
brothers. 

The birth of a prince to Queen Margaret in October, 1453, 
intensified an already strained situation. In November 
Jasper attended the council for the first time as a privy 
councillor, York being present, and Somerset absent ; and 
he attended again in December 3 . A more significant proof 
of the half-brothers' faith in the duke of York occurred 
a few weeks later. For when, in January 1454, the nobles 
were swept to London by the news of the king's imbecility, 
both were reported to have come in the company of the duke 
of York and the earl of Warwick with a large following, and 
to have been in danger of being arrested 4 . York was 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 1452-1461 ; 49-112 ; passim. 

2 Ibid. 104, July 24, 1453. Edmund Tudor was given " a house in 
London called Baynard's Castle." Ibid. 79, March 30. Both received the 
keeping of the possessions of John, duke of Somerset, during the minority 
of Margaret. Ibid. 79 ; March 24. Two Welshmen, Morgan Meredith 
and John Roger, were keepers of the armoury of all the king's castles 
in South Wales. Morgan Meredith was in the service of Humphrey, duke 
of Gloucester, and held this post in 1442. Ibid. (1441-1447) 65. Cal. 
Pat. Rolls, 106, July 5, 1453. A certain Henry ap Griffith of Backeton, 
Herefordshire, late of Newcourt, received a pardon. Ibid. March 26. He was 
steward of Usk and Caerleon. Welsh MSS. British Museum, 1. 643. 

3 Proceedings of the Privy Council. At the P. C. meeting, Nov. 21, 1453, 
York again protested that he had come to do all he could for the king's 
welfare. See Paston Letters, Introduction, and Appendix. 

4 " The erls of Warwyk, Richmond, and Pembroke comen with the 
Duke of York, as it is said, everych of them with a godely feleschip, and 
as Geoffrey Poole seithe, the Kynges bretherne been like to be arrested at 
their comyng to London, yf they come." Paston Letters, 1. 266. Jan. 19, 1454. 



iv] HERBERT AND TUDOR 85 

expected in London on January 25th 1 . There is no valid 
reason for doubting this statement as to the friendly relations 
between the Tudors and York. The grant of the Pembroke 
estates to Jasper probably gave offence to Margaret. There 
is no evidence to show that he had the least sympathy with 
Somerset, whose unpopularity increased with the final loss 
of France in the previous year ; while during York's pro- 
tectorate, although many Lancastrian lords were placed 
under guard, Jasper and Edmund were in attendance on 
the king 2 . 

The duke of York became Protector in March, 1454. 
Somerset was put in prison. Jasper Tudor frequently 
attended the meetings of the privy council 3 , and in November 
signed a series of arrangements for regulating the royal 
household, although in effect they considerably reduced the 
retinue of the king 4 . 

Henry recovered in December ; Somerset was released 
First battle of an d acquitted of the charges brought against 
st Aibans. him 5 . In May, 1455, a council was called to 
meet at Leicester, nominally " to provide for the safety of 
the king's person against his enemies." The duke of York 
looked upon it as a declaration of war, marched on London 
from Wales 6 , and defeated the royal troops at the first 
battle of St Albans (May 22, 1455). Somerset was 
slain. 

The duke of Buckingham, lord of Brecknock, was with 

1 Paston Letters, Intro. This Geoffrey Poole was perhaps the king's 
servant and keeper of tents. Patent Rolls, 1459, 499. A Geoffrey Pole 
was constable and steward of Haverfordwest, after the death of Sir Rowland 
Lenthal. Cal. Pat. Rolls, Jan. 28, 1442, 67. 

- Edmund was Lord Attendant on the king Nov. 13, 1454. Proceedings, 
vi. 222. 

3 Proceedings, vi. 167, passim. 

4 Ibid. He was absent on April I, 1454, when George Neville was 
recommended for the next vacant bishopric. 

5 York and Jasper were present at a Council at Greenwich, March 4, 
1455, when Somerset was cleared. Ibid. 

• Whethamstede, 11. 161. He collected his army "in finibus Walliae 
et de prope infra regnum Angliae exercitum fortem et grandem." See also 
Fabyan, 629. 



86 HERBERT AND TUDOR [ch. 

the royalists. Jasper possibly accompanied the king to 
St Albans 1 though he does not appear to have taken any part 
in the fight. He was among those who took the oath to 
Henry VI soon afterwards 2 . His brother Edmund's name 
does not appear ; nor did he subscribe to the general oath 
of allegiance. As we shall see he was busy in West Wales. 
Jasper meanwhile remained in attendance on his royal 
master. In June, 1456, he was at Sheen with the king, and 
no other lords were present 3 . 

Among the offices assumed by the duke of York after 
the battle of St Albans were those of constable of Carmar- 
then Castle, steward of Wydegada and Elvet, and captain 
and constable of Aberystwyth 4 , with as many soldiers as 
were wont to stay there. Jasper Tudor did not witness the 
grant of the protectorate to him 5 . 

York summoned parliament, and part of its business 
was " to ordain and purvey for the restfull and sadde rule 
in Wales, and set apart such riots and disobeisances as have 
been there afore this time 6 ." Lawlessness was everywhere 
rampant in Wales, and Merionethshire subsisted on cattle 
stealing, private feuds, burning of houses and murders. 
Market day at Dolgelly and Conway was a festival of looting 
and plunder 7 . 

1 Paston Letters, I. 327. Though his name is not on the list given on 
page 332, he was probably in attendance on the king. 

2 Rot. Pari. 282. July 23, 1455. 

3 Paston Letters, 1. 392. June 7, 1456. 

4 Pat. Rol. June 2, 1455, 245. These offices were re-granted to 
Jasper on April 21, 1457. The earl of Wiltshire, a royalist at St Albans 
and afterwards, was at this time sheriff of Carmarthen and Cardigan shires ; 
see Act of Resumption. The constable of Aberystwyth since 1443 was the 
duke of Somerset. In that year he was ordered to appoint no man his 
deputy without the authority of the council. He succeeded Sir John 
Griffith. The castle had one man-at-arms and twelve archers. Pro- 
ceedings, v. 134, 244. 

6 Rot. Pari. 453. 

• Rot. Pari. 279, 1455. 

7 Arch. Camb. 1. i — iii ; passim. 



iv] HERBERT AND TUDOR S 7 



APPENDIX 

Y modd i doeth kariad hrwng Ywain Tudur ar vrenhines. 

Ynn ol proses hrai o lyvre lloygyr ac opiniwn y saesson ni oddevai 

y kyngor o loegyr ir vrenhines gattrin briodi neb yn lloegyr ac ir 

ydoedd hi ynni chwnnychu or achos i bu hi yn weddw serttain o amser 

ynn yr amser ir ydoedd ysgwier o wynedd yn wasnaethwr ac yn 

sewer i ennaur vrenhines yr hwnn a oedd yn karu un o law vorynion 

y vrenhines yr hon a ganvu y matter. Ac ar ddiwrnod garllaw llys 

y vrenhines ynn amser haaf i digwyddodd ir asgwier hwn vynd i 

novio i avon a oedd yn llithro gan ysdlys mur y llys y neb a ganvu 

Haw vorwyn v vrenhines yn vuan yr hon a ddanges y mater ir 

vrenhines yr hwnn a ddoeth i ffenesdyr i edrych ar y gwyr yn novio 

ymysg yr hrain i gwelai y vrenhines un or gwyr yn rhagori i gym- 

deithion o degwch knawd or achos i govynnodd y vrenhines wel 

dackw wr ysydd yn yckaru chwi yn vawr yn wir heber y verch von- 

heddig velly i mae ef yn dywedud ac yn wir ni chaaf i fynned i le 

ynn y byd och golwg chwi ar ni bo ef ynn vyngorllwyn i. Wele 

hebyr y vrenvines gad imi vynned noswaith yn dy rrith di ynnlle 

y boch i ynn arver o gyvarvod a myvi a wnaf iddo ef nad amyro 

ef arnatti o hynny allan ac o vewn ychydig o amser ynnol hyn i 

gwnaeth y Haw vorwyn oed ar gyvarvod ac ywain mewn galerie 

gerllaw sdavell y vrenhines Ir hon i dangoses y Haw vorwyn gwbwl 

or kyvrang a oedd hryngthi hi ac ywain : ar vrenhines a gymerth 

archennad i Haw vorwyn ac ynny ty wyll y hi a aeth ir galerey ynnyman 

ir ydoedd ywain yn disgwyl i gariad yn lie yr hon i kymerth ef y 

vrenhines erbynn i mwnnwgyl i ymkannu hroddi kussann yw gennau 

hi yr hon a droes i grudd att i enau ef ac ynnol uddunt hwy ymddiddan 

serttain o eiriau bob un ai gilidd y vo a ganvu oleuad yn dyvod 

megis pedviasai y vrenhines ynn dyvod yw shiambyr or achos i 

keishiodd ef roddi kusan yw min hi wrth ymadel yr hon a droes i 

grudd atto ef ynnyr un modd or achos i tybiodd ef nad y hi aeodd 

i gariad ef or achos y vo a vrathodd i grudd hi ai ddannedd megis 

ac i gallai ef wybod a gweled yn ynnysbys pwy a oedd ynni watwar 

ef ynny modd ar yr hyn yr ymadewis ywain ar vrenhines arsswyd 

y goleuad ynnol yr hyn Ir aeth y vrenhines yw shiambyr ac ywain 

yw letty. A thrannoeth i gorchmynodd y vrenhines yw shiambyr 

len orchymyn ywain i vod yn sewr iddi hi ar ginnio y dethwn hwnnw 

yr hyn gyvlownoedd. Ac ynnol i ywain osod y bwyd ar y bwrdd 

ynni ordyr megis ac ir ydoedd i swydd ef yw wneuthud y vo a droes 

i wyneb at y vrenhines yr hon aoedd yn ymolchi i vynned yw chinio 

yn yr amser ir adrychodd hi'n ffyrnig ar ywain drwy roddi i bys 

ar i grudd ar yr hwn i gwelai ef blasdyr or achos i gosdyngodd ef 



88 HERBERT AND TUDOR [ch. iv 

i ben drwy aadde ynnigalon mae y vrenhines a vrathassai ef i grudd 
ynnos ynnyblaen or achos ynnol opiniwn hrau o lyvre ir ymkanodd 
ef gymerud i varch a marchogaeth yw wlad hrag ovon y vrenhines 
yr hon ynnol opiniwn hrai eraill or bobyl a ddanvonasai orchymyn 
ar y porthorion ar gadw ywain o vewn pyrth y llys onnid ni wna 
mater pa un or ddau vodd i dykpwyd y vo garbron y vrenhines 
yr hon o vewn ychydig amser ynnol a wnaeth gymaint o honaw 
ef ac iddi ymkanu i briodi ef or achos ynnol opiniwn y bobyl y hi 
a ddanvones un oi herawds i Gymru i ymovun pa wr i gennedlaeth 
oydd ef yr hwn a ddoeth i dy i fam ef ynn ddisymwth ac y hi yn 
eisde wrth y tan ac yn bwytta i chinio oddiar i gliniau ai harffed 
ar neb ac ymhlith boneddigion y wlad ir ymovynodd yr herawd am 
i ach ywain. 

(Owen's genealogy follows.) 

Ac ni bu haiach o ennyd ynol hyn nes ir vrenhines briodi ywain 
yn ddirgel. Mostyn MS. 158 ; p. 306. 



CHAPTER V 

THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD 

It has been customary, in dealing with the disposition 
of forces in Wales during the Wars of the Roses, 

Lancastrians u 

and Yorkists to assign the west to the Lancastrians and the 
east to the Yorkists. Broadly speaking, this 
division represents accurately enough the strength of 
the rival parties at the commencement of hostilities ; for 
the extensive Mortimer estates gave the duke of York a 
striking predominance in the Marches ; while the Lancas- 
trians could claim supremacy in the Principality (Anglesey, 
Carnarvonshire and Merionethshire), in the royal counties 
of South Wales (Cardiganshire and Carmarthenshire) , and in 
the county-palatine of Pembroke under Jasper Tudor. But 
when we come to details the Marches do not present a uniform 
political complexion. The wide lordship of Brecknock 
belonged to the Staffords, at the head of whom was the duke 
of Buckingham, a prominent and consistent Lancastrian. 
He was thus wedged in between the earl of Warwick in 
Glamorgan and the duke of York in Mid-Wales. There 
were Lancastrian estates, too, at Monmouth and in the 
lower valley of the Wye. The loyalist Talbot, earl of 
Shrewsbury, was situated between Shrewsbury and Mont- 
gomery, and was supported by the Beauforts and the 
Mowbrays in the valley of the Dee. Of the lesser gentry 
in the Marches, the Skydmores of Herefordshire and the 
Pulestons of Denbighshire gave effective support to the 
cause of the dynasty. On the other hand, South-west Wales 



90 THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

from Gower to Pembroke and northwards to Aberystwyth 
was more uniformly Lancastrian, the Dwnns of the neigh- 
bourhood of Kidwely being the only conspicuous Yorkists. 
For a few years after the battle of St Albans the centre 
The of gravity of the war was transferred to Wales 

importance of and the Marches. York's chief citadels were 

the Marches. . . . . .. 

at Wigmore and Ludlow, which dominated 
Mid-Wales. Margaret, with a skilful analysis of the military 
situation, realised that if she would triumph she must 
challenge him where his resources were greatest. To do this 
it would be necessary to mobilise her friends there and 
brush up recruits, a task in which she showed conspicuous 
ardour and resolution. She could naturally rely upon the 
Principality ; and she became personally responsible for the 
loyalty of Cheshire and the border counties. In Cheshire 
and the surrounding districts she was conciliatory ; in Mid- 
Wales, where York was most powerful, exacting and defiant. 
With profound tact and practical sense she sent Edmund 
Tudor, earl of Richmond, to Wales. Nothing could have 
been more opportune than the choice of a Tudor for a 
recruiting mission in these parts. Edmund's Welsh pedigree 
was a key which would throw wide open the hearts of men. 
His father, Owen Tudor, had within recent years come 
amongst them as a refugee, a fact which rendered still more 
charitable the public conscience of the Welsh. 

Edmund Tudor came to Pembroke early in 1456. The 

most representative chieftain in these parts was 
TudoTand Griffith ap Nicholas, with whom Richmond 

Griffith a P would have to reckon sooner or later. It 

Nicholas. 

happened sooner. Griffith's unhappy entangle- 
ment in the affairs of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester, had 
revealed to him the treacherous quicksands of politics, 
though it lifted him to a higher plane of public recognition. 
In 1449 he came under the vigilant eye of the duke of York, 
who entrusted him with the important castle of Narberth 
in Pembrokeshire. In October 1450, he was on a com- 



v] THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD 91 

mission " to array all men-at-arms, hobelers and archers 
in West Wales, and bring them to the sea-coast to expel 
the king's enemies, and to set up beacons and survey the 
muster and keep watches." Others on the commission were 
Sir James Audley, Sir Henry Wogan, Sir John Skydmore 
and Thomas ap Griffith ap Nicholas 1 . Griffith was thus 
at the zenith of his power when he presided over the famous 
eisteddfod of Carmarthen, which is said to have been held 
about 1453, and the proceedings of which constitute an 
important landmark in the history of Welsh literature. In 
such circumstances the advent of Edmund Tudor was not 
altogether free from embarrassments. Heroes of small 
communities are proverbially intolerant of rivals, and Griffith 
at first regarded the earl of Richmond as a rival. The 
latter may have been insidious, and was certainly rash ; for 
within a few months of his arrival there was a fierce clash 
between him and Griffith, which resounded in the east of 
England. Although ten years had elapsed since the Glou- 
cester affair, Richmond may have viewed Griffith as a 
prospective adherent of the duke of York, the political 
successor of Humphrey. On the other hand, he might have 
reflected that on the commission of 1450 Griffith was the 
colleague of such unflinching loyalists as Audley and Skyd- 
more. However, in June, 1456, Griffith and the earl of 
Richmond were " at war greatly 2 ." Whatever may have 
been the origin of the feud there were no dregs of bitterness. 
In October Griffith and his two sons Thomas and Owen 
received a full pardon, which emanated from the new 
Government of the queen 3 . The Yorkist ministry had been 
dismissed earlier in the month. Henceforth the family 
was loyal to the cause of the Tudors. The allegiance of 
such an enthusiastic and enlightened patriot as Griffith ap 
Nicholas was a guarantee that the bards whom he liberally 
patronised would be won over ; and they could become 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls (1446-1452), 432. 2 Pasion Letters, I. 392. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls (1452-1461) 326; Oct. 26, 1456. 



92 THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

a powerful weapon in the hands of a capable leader. They 
traversed the country frequently, and with great industry 
and ingenuity preached the fiery doctrine of nationality. 
In doing so they, for the time being, necessarily cried up 
the cause of the dynasty as represented by the Tudors. 
For the first time, though not for the last in the history of 
Wales, Welsh nationalism was used as a lever in the party 
politics of England. 

Edmund Tudor was not destined long to remain at the 
head of the Lancastrians of West Wales. Within a month 
of the peace between him and Griffith he died at Pembroke, 
in November, 1456. At the same place two months later 
(January 28, 1457) his wife, Margaret Beaufort, gave birth 
to a son, Henry Tudor, afterwards Henry VII. Edmund's 
place was immediately taken by his brother Jasper, who 
continued and amplified the project already begun. Hitherto 
Jasper had kept in close touch with the king 1 . 

Jasper Tudor has not received from historians in general 
the attention which he deserves. He certainly 

Jasper Tudor. "[ 

did not dazzle contemporary chroniclers. With 
modern writers he cuts a meagre figure, and has been 
relegated to a series of brackets or a note of interrogation. 
It is the penalty he has had to pay for having chosen Wales 
as his sphere of action. None showed more unselfish loyalty 
to the cause of the Crown, or greater resource in defending 
it. Sleepless in his devotion to his party for nearly thirty 
years, he laboured more assiduously than any other to shape 
its destiny. His achievements in the open field were 
negligible ; the only victory in which he could claim a share 
was the final triumph of his cause at Bosworth. But, 
from his entry into political life he displayed extraordinary 
skill and tenacity in reorganising his forces after defeat, as 
well as a keen zest for the shifts of statecraft. His strategy 

1 His name appears on numerous commissions in London, Kent and 
Sussex in 1456. Cal. Pat. Rolls (1456-1461), 306-7. See also ibid. 359, 
viz. a grant to him and the king's sergeant, Thomas Vaughan, of Garlek 
and Stebenhithe. See Glyn Cothi's ode to Edmund Tudor (vttt. x.). 



v] THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD 93 

was that of timely retreat when victory had eluded his grasp. 
He alone of the leaders on either side lived through the 
struggle and witnessed its close. Sometimes lurking in 
caverns and woods, sometimes traversing lonely mountain 
paths, sometimes stranded on a deserted shore, he continued 
to hold in his hands the thread of Lancastrian hopes. Shrewd, 
adroit, and persevering, he was undaunted by the caprice 
of fortune, and successfully braved the perilous vicissitudes 
incident to his arduous undertaking. And in an age of brutal 
passion he emerged with his fame untarnished by any deed 
of cruelty or wrong ; while the affectionate care which he 
bestowed upon his fatherless nephew, Henry Tudor, throws 
into relief the hideous ferocity that surrounded him 1 . 

Ther is a sayle-yeard fulle good and sure, 
To the shyp a grete tresour, 
For alle stormes it wolle endure, 
It is trusty atte nede. 
Now the sayle-yeard I wolle reherse, 
The Erie of Pembroke, curtys and ferce, 
Across the mast he hyethe travers, 
The good ship for to lede 2 . 

His first task was to fortify the allegiance of Griffith 
n •<«♦., a P Nicholas. That he succeeded in this there 

(irittitn ap x 

Nicholas a can be no doubt ; for, apart from the evidence 

Lancastrian. 

of William of Worcester, there is sufficient 
testimony in contemporary Welsh writings. It will be 
necessary to substantiate this, because the only existing 
life of Griffith portrays him as a martyr in the cause of York 
at Mortimer's Cross 3 . 

In an ode written about 1457-8 Lewis Glyn Cothi says : 
" That warrior we love who will bring support to the Crown 4 ." 

1 There are glowing panegyrics on Jasper in Lewis Glyn Cothi and other 
contemporary Welsh writers. 

2 Political Poems, Archaeologia, 1842, 328. 

3 The Cambrian Register, already alluded to. 
1 Y gwr hwnnw a garwn 

A dry gwyr gyda'r goron. Lewis Glyn Cothi, 1. 133. 



94 THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

Again, " He (Griffith) is staunch and faithful to the throne 1 ." 
In another ode written about the same time, the poet refers 
to Owen, the son of Griffith ap Nicholas, as a captain in the 
royal army 2 . 

Under the influence of the same set of circumstances 
the poet wrote an ode to Jasper, in which he does something 
more than eulogise the generosity of his subject after the 
fashion then in vogue. He gives proof of profound intimacy 
with the political situation in that year — the hopes centred 
in the young Prince Edward, the memory of Queen Catherine, 
the care of Jasper for his young ward Henry of Richmond, 
the treasonable designs of the Yorkists, the royal blood in 
Jasper's veins, his Welsh extraction, and above all his 
efforts to unite Wales for his king 3 . It is characteristic of 
the poet to appropriate him as a Welshman, and to make 
him the leader and champion not of a faction, but of the 
Welsh against the English 4 . Other contemporary Welsh 
poets also give indirect evidence of Griffith's loyalty to 
Henry 5 . 

The most influential Yorkist in West Wales was John 

Cywir a gvvirion yw'r gwr i'r goron, 

Cynghor fydd i hon ger bron brenin. Lewis Glyn Cothi. 
The editor of Lewis Glyn Cothi states that the poet is here advocating 
the rights of Richard, duke of York, and that Griffith was preparing to 
assist the Yorkists at Mortimer's Cross, as if that event could have been 
foreseen. He takes his cue, it need hardly be said, from the biography 
of Griffith already criticised. 

* Mastr Owen o'r mwstr reial. " Owen of the royal army." Lewis 
Glyn Cothi, i. 139. 

The editor gives a curious interpretation to reial in these lines, which 
we cannot admit. He translates it strong or very good. 
3 Aeth dano mTago ! egin Deheubarth, 

Hebog y Queen Catrin ; 
Un brawd ynn a barai win, 
Un fron yw hwn a'i frenin. 



Henri frenin fordd ydd el hinon 
Ev a a'r gwareu, ev a'r goron, 
Edwart dywysog heb dretusion 
A gieidw'r ynys a gwaywdur union. 

Lewis Glyn Cothi. 

This ode contains an inspiring panegyric on Jasper. 

4 Ev a wery'r sies vry a'r Saeson. Ibid. 

* Cardiff MSS. 



v] THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD 95 

Dwnn, although he does not figure prominently till later in 

the struggle. However, on March 1, 1459, Jasper 

secures Tudor, Owen Tudor, and the two sons of Griffith 

West Wales 

ap Nicholas, Thomas and Owen, were com- 
missioned to arrest certain individuals, amongst whom were 
some of the servants of John Dwnn 1 . We may not be 
justified in attaching political significance to the affair ; 
but it certainly affords additional evidence of a complete 
reconciliation between the Tudors and the family of Griffith 
ap Nicholas ; while its chronological proximity 'to the 
Ludford campaign gives it additional piquancy. By that 
time Jasper's sleepless assiduity had achieved the virtual 
unity of South-west Wales. 

It is not always safe to argue from marriage alliances 
at this period. Still, it is suggestive that Maud, a daughter 
of Griffith ap Nicholas, was the wife of the consistent Lan- 
castrian, Sir John Skydmore of Herefordshire, who held 
Pembroke castle for Jasper Tudor against Herbert a few 
years later than the time with which we are now dealing. 
Another daughter married Philip Mansel, also a consistent 
Lancastrian. 

Having secured Griffith, Jasper entered upon another 
phase of activity, namely, to strengthen his own earldom 
and take possession of other strongholds in West Wales. 
His immediate predecessors in the earldom, Humphrey, 
duke of Gloucester, and the earl of Suffolk, did not appreciate 
its military value. Humphrey, indeed, had drawn a con- 
siderable following from the surrounding districts, but his 
visits and those of his successor were casual. The Tudors 
made it their base of operations. It was the expansive 
genius of Jasper that realised the vast importance of Pem- 
broke and Tenby castles, and how they might be made 
a connecting link between England on the one hand, and 
France, Ireland and Scotland on the other. By means 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls (1452-14G1) 494. 



96 THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

of them he was able, on many occasions, to escape his 
pursuers and draw support from beyond the sea. 

Assigning Pembroke to the countess of Richmond and her 
son, he apparently made Tenby his own headquarters. His 
letters that have survived the destructive hand of time are 
both dated from there. He devoted considerable time and 
expense to raising and strengthening the walls with a view 
to establishing the place as an important military and naval 
post 1 . Moreover, in April of that year he seized personal 
control over the outlying castles of Carregcennen, Carmar- 
then, and Aberystwyth, by securing the constableship of 
each for himself 2 . The duke of York, whom he displaced 
in these vital fortresses, was reported as having relinquished 
them at the king's desire, receiving in lieu thereof a grant 
of forty pounds a year 3 . But it is impossible not to perceive 
in the transaction a hypocritical and intriguing bargain 
for the aggrandisement of the Tudors in this part of 
Wales. 

Meanwhile the queen herself was in a state of nervous 
activity. In March, 1456, she took measures to 

Margaret in J 

the Marches, put Flint castle m a state of defence 4 , while 
she spent the greater part of the spring in the 
neighbourhood of Chester. She returned again in the 
autumn, was at Chester on October 24, and at Shrewsbury 
from October 31 to November 4 5 . The duke of York 
diagnosed the situation in the Marches with equal skill. 
On the fall of his protectorate early in October he retired, 
to Wigmore. Each kept a close watch on the other, though, 

1 Arch. Cambr., Vol. xiii. 5th series (1457). The castle-walls of Tenby 
even to this day bear witness to his activity. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls (1452-1461). 

3 Ibid. 340, April 21, 1457. Rymer, xi. 388. It has been stated, 
without authority, that Jasper received Denbigh in this year. Diet. Nat. 
Biog. sub nom. It seems impossible, for Denbigh belonged to York. 
Jasper received the constableship of it after Ludford. 

4 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 280. March 12, 1456. Sir Thomas Rempston was 
constable. For a number of commissions to Jasper Tudor and others see 
ibid. 1456 (April-June), 306-7. 

5 Privy Seals, 1456-7. 



v] THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD 97 

as events proved, Margaret acted with greater resolution 
and used her time to greater advantage. 

In the spring of the following year Margaret, accom- 
wiiiiam panied by the king, the duke of Buckingham, 

Herbert's and the earl of Shrewsbury, once more traversed 

the borders. They were at Hereford during 
April (1457) ; from there they had removed to Worcester 
by May 4 1 . In these parts Sir William Herbert had begun 
to display sinister manifestations of restlessness. For some 
years after his return from Normandy his lot was cast in 
the eddies of local affairs rather than in the main stream 
of political controversy and feud 2 . Basing her judgment on 
the friendly relations which she knew had subsisted between 
the duke of York and Herbert's father, Margaret may have 
looked upon him as a presumptive opponent 3 . On the other 
hand there is reason to suspect an early friendship between 
the Herberts and the Tudors. In 1454 Edmund Tudor, 
earl of Richmond, had made William Herbert a grant of 
ten pounds a year, to be taken from some of the former's 
English estates 4 ; while in the same year one of the Herberts 
secured an interest in the royal lordship of Dynevor 5 . 

With a clear prevision of the balance of forces in the 
Marches Margaret spared no effort to attach the Herberts to 
her chariot, for the many branches of his family and of that 
of Roger Vaughan would be a valuable asset on one side 
or the other. With the assistance of Jasper in West Wales, 
of the duke of Buckingham in Brecknock, and of the Herberts 
in Gwent, she might reasonably hope to overwhelm the duke 

1 Privy Seals, Fabyan, 630. Paston Letters, 1. 416-7. 

2 Clark, Glamorgan Charters, op. cit. v. passim. 

3 Paston Letters. The correspondent apparently regarded him as such. 

4 Dated Oct. 1, 1454. The grant was ratified in Oct. 1460. Cal. Pat. 
Rolls, 627. The same year he and Sir Walter Devereux, Sir Henry Wogan, 
Henry Stradling, and Walter Devereux were associated in another grant! 
Ibid. 215. 

6 Minister's Accounts, 1168, No. 8. West Wales Hist. Soc. Trans., 11. 
112, Lewis ap Gwilym ap Thomas was associated with him, with Henry ap 
Gwilym as a pledge. The Herbert referred to is designated " William 
Herbert, armiger." 

E. W. R. n 



98 THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

of York. Circumstances favoured her project. The Her- 
berts and Vaughans became involved in some disturbances 
on the borders in the early part of 1457, and Margaret's visit 
to those parts between April and May was made ostensibly 
with the object of suppressing them 1 . 

It is true that at the sessions of oyer and terminer held 
at Hereford in that year Herbert was adjudged guilty of 
treason, and seven tuns of Gascon wine belonging to him, 
then lying at the port of Bristol, were forfeited 2 . On 
May 22, this property was restored to him ; and on June 7, 
at Coventry, he was admitted to a general pardon 3 . A 
number of his relatives and associates in Brecknock, Mon- 
mouth and Herefordshire, notably his brothers Richard 
Herbert of Abergavenny and Thomas Herbert, and the sons 
of Roger Vaughan of Tretower , were among those who were 
pardoned at the same time 4 . It must be admitted, however, 
that the duke of York did not anticipate any wavering 
allegiance on the part of Herbert, for he was steward of 
York's lordship of Usk as late as Dec. n, 1458 5 . 

The reference by a London correspondent to these 

disturbances suggests that they were of more 

He'rbert-s than local significance, and that the allegiance 

loyalty to f ^ e Herbert connection was important ; but 

Lancaster. * 

the chief point to be noted is that Herbert 
promised fidelity to the Crown. Of this the correspondent 

1 The reference in the Clans Rerum to Herbert's treason, already 
mentioned, may be in connection with these events. It any case it cannot 
affect the argument in the text. 

2 Privy Seals, May 22, 1457. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 353. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 360. Among those pardoned were : William ap 
Morgan ap David Gamme, gentleman, late of Raglan ; John ap Richard, 
late of Weobley, clerk ; John ap Robert Raglan, late of Llantwit, gentleman ; 
John ap Gwilym, late of Chepstow, gentleman ; Thomas Herbert of 
Little Troye, the elder, squire ; Adam ap Howel, late of Cardiff, gentleman ; 
Philip Vaughan, late of Llamekon, alias Llamelion ; Roger ap Rosser 
Vaughan, late of Tretower ; Richard Herbert of Abergavenny ; Miles ap 
Harry of Newcourt ; Thomas Trahaiarn ap Ievan ap Meurig of Usk ; 
Thomas ap Roger Vaughan of Hergest ; Hugh ap Jankyn ap Ievan ap 
Madoc of Usk ; Thomas Herbert the younger of Little Troye ; William ap 
Rees and Henry Griffith of Herefordshire. Ibid. 367. 

4 For the Vaughans of Bredwardine see end of chapter. 

5 Catalogue Welsh MSS. British Museum, 1. 667. 



v] THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD 99 

referred to, as well as subsequent events, leaves no doubt 1 . 
Herbert, it is stated, would appear at Leicester on condition 
that his life was spared and his estates secured to him. 
The letter is as follows : '" The Queen and the King at 
Hereford, the lords Buckingham, Shrewsbury and others. . . . 
And now it is stated that Herbert shall come in and appear 
at Leicester before the King and the lords, his life granted 
and goods, so he make amends to them he hath offended. 
Many be indicted, some causeless which maketh Herbert 
party strong. And the burgess and gentlemen about 
Hereford will go with the King, wife and child, unless a peace 
be made before the King depart thence ; for else Herbert and 
his affinity will acquit them, as it is said. ... I send a bill of the 
names indicted to my master and you to see and laugh at 
their Welsh names descended of old pedigrees 2 ." Henceforth, 
till after the panic at Ludford in 1459, he was an associate 
of Lancaster rather than of York, a fact which helps partly 
to explain that calamity. 

There is striking evidence of Herbert's loyalty to the 
throne at this period in contemporary Welsh literature. In 
one of his odes Lewis Glyn Cothi refers to Gwilym Gwent 
as an ardent partisan of Jasper Tudor. " If Jasper should 
strike, Gwilym also would strike for the Crown, a mighty 
eagle in the ranks of Jasper of Pembroke." In another 
couplet of the same ode the poet states Gwilym was also 
one of the party of Herbert : "A thousand blessings on 
William, a party to the earl Herbert 3 ." 

* Paston Letters, I. 416-7. Written at London, May 1, 1457. 

2 Gairdiner refers to Herbert as " a steady Yorkist." Ramsay, Oman, 
and others have taken the same view, which is not strictly accurate. 
Editors of fifteenth century Welsh poetry have laboured under the same 
delusion, and have thus been compelled to distort obvious references to 
him as a Lancastrian. 

3 O bai ar Siasper daro, 
Trwy fil y t'rawai fo. 

Again, 

l'r goron, rywiawg eryr, 

Vry i Iarll Penfro a'i wyr. 

Lewis Glyn Cothi, VIII. vii. 
This Gwilym Gwent I identify with William ap Norman who is 

7—2 



ioo THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

The same poet has another ode to one Henry ap Gwilym, 
probably the same who became a pledge for the William 
Herbert who was farmer of the lordship of Dynevor 1 . In 
this ode the poet states in effect that the lord of Gwent, 
William, entered the service of Prince Edward 2 . When we 
come to deal with the disposal of the lands and offices of 
the Yorkists after the panic of Ludford there will be forth- 
coming still more definite proof of Herbert's attitude during 
these few years. 

The situation in South-east Wales was very complicated, 
and it was evident that Herbert would have to steer his craft 
very warily for some time. He was surrounded by formidable 
partisans. The earl of Warwick, York's most powerful ally, 
held the rich and compact lordship of Glamorgan, with its 
strong piles at Cardiff, Caerphilly, Neath, and Llantrissant. 
The constable of Cardiff at this time was William's brother, 
Thomas Herbert 3 . On the north stretched the lordship of 

mentioned by William of Worcester, Itinerarium, 122. He had fought 
shoulder to shoulder with Mathew Gough in France, vide ante. 
Again, 

Bendith canmil i Wilym, 
Barti i'r iarll Herbert rym. Ibid. 
The editor interprets " parti " as " opponent," an impossible translation. 
He wrongly supposed that " Herbert was a Yorkist to the last and of course 
an opponent of Jasper." The Welsh epithet " iarll " was a mark of respect 
to a patron. 

1 Vide ante. His home was in the vale of Towy. From evidences 
in contemporary poetry we gather that he was a partisan of Jasper. 

2 Iesu gwyn i wisgo ei art 

A geidw y t'wysawg Edwart. 
Iarll o Went arall aeth 
Yn oes hwn i'w wasanaeth, 
Iarll William . . Lewis Glyn Cothi, vm. viii. 

That the poet here refers to Prince Edward, and not to Edward IV, 
may be inferred from another ode to Jasper, written about the same time, 
in which Jasper is eulogised as the defender of the rights of King Henry 
and Prince Edward. In the poem Edward is called duke of Cornwall. 
This can only refer to Henry's son, who was created duke of Cornwall, 
earl of Chester, and prince of Wales in March, 1454. The son of Edward IV 
was made duke of Cornwall in July, 1471. Vide ante. Henry ap Gwilym 
was of Court Henry in Carmarthenshire and remained true to Lancaster. 
Jaspar wayw llachar myn bedd Llechid ! 
O dir Gwynedd y darogenid, 
Henri a'i deulu'n hir au dilyd 
Ai wayw du llyfn wedi y llivid. Ibid. ill. iv. 

3 Clark, v. 1638. See also Cal. Pat. Rolls, 518. Warwick obtained 



vj THE CAMPAIGN 0^ LUDFORD ioi 

Brecknock, the patrimony of the duke of Buckingham, who 
was a conspicuous Lancastrian. In Herefordshire, Sir Walter 
Devereux had already ranged himself on the side of York, 
and Sir John Skydmore on the side of the queen. Being thus 
enveloped Sir William Herbert might easily have become 
a victim to the Lancastrian Scylla or the Yorkist Charybdis, 
for his resources were as yet very limited. Devereux lost 
his estates after the Ludford campaign in 1459, and Skyd- 
more suffered confiscation after Mortimer's Cross. Herbert 
trimmed his sails so dexterously that he profited from both 
storms. He was able to convince Margaret of his loyalty 
without forfeiting the friendship of York and Warwick. 

Meanwhile, the range of Jasper Tudor's influence grew 
apace. In November, 1457, he was empowered to cut down 
for sale two hundred acres of wood in Sherwood forest, 
Notts. 1 In the following January he and John Talbot, 
earl of Shrewsbury, were put in possession of the lands of 
Henry Tudor, earl of Richmond, during his minority 2 . In 
April 1459 he has made quit of all fines for charters, letters 
patent, and other writs in Chancery. In May he was given 
" a tower in the lower end of the great hall within West- 
minster Palace, for the communication and easement of 
the earl and his council, to hold as the Queen holds the other 
tower at the end of the hall at the entry of the Exchequer 
for her and her council 3 ." These grants were undoubtedly 
part of Jasper's equipment for the struggle which was now 
impending. 

In the spring of 1459 the queen turned her attention 
once more to Cheshire, where she allied " to her the 



Glamorgan by marriage. His wife was Anne Beauchamp, heiress of her 
niece of the same name who died in 1449. This niece was the daughter 
of Henry Beauchamp, earl of Warwick and lord of Glamorgan (d. 1445). 
This Henry was the son of Richard Beauchamp, earl of Warwick and 
lord of Glamorgan (d. 1439), and Isabel Despenser, heiress of Thomas, 
earl of Gloucester. 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 398. 

2 Ibid. 433, " except those in Lincolnshire." 

3 Ibid. 486-7. 



ioa THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

knights and squires in these parts, for to have their 
benevolence, and held open household among 
m5![ «!* them, and made her son give a livery blazoned 



again on 
the bordi 
of Wales. 



with a swan to all gentlemen of the country, 



trusting through their strength to make her son 
king ; for she was making privy means to lords of England 
to stir the king to resign the crown, but she could not bring 
her purpose about 1 ." 

The duke of York was then at Ludlow where " he gathered 
Bioreheath to him a strong host of marchmen and other 2 ." 
23 sept. 1459- jhg ear { f Salisbury, while hastening from 
Middleham in Yorkshire to join him there, was intercepted 
at Bioreheath by Margaret's Cheshire levies under Lord 
Audley (September 23, 1459) 3 . The Lancastrians, though 
considerably outnumbering their opponents, were repulsed. 
The main army of Margaret was close at hand 4 . Salisbury 
therefore discreetly retired under cover of darkness, " while 
an Awstin friar shot off guns all that night in a park at the 
back of the field, and by this means the earl came to the 
duke of York. And on the morrow they found neither man 
nor child in that park save that friar only, and he said it was 
for fear he abode in that park all that night 5 ." 

Sir John Dwnn of Cheshire, who was knighted on that 
day, was one of the victims on the Lancastrian side. " In 
the morning, between the battlefield and Cheshire, his son, 
who was at home in his father's place, had word that his 
father was slain. Anon he raised his tenants, and beside 
a little town named Tarporley took Sir Thomas Neville, 
Sir John Neville, and Sir Thomas Harrington, and brought 
them to Chester, and there they abode till the battle of 

1 English Chronicle, edit. Davies, 79-80. 

2 Fabyan, 634. 

3 English Chronicle, edit. Davies, 80. Audley held the barony of 
Cemmaes, Pembrokeshire. He was the great-great-grandson of Joan, 
daughter of William, baron Martin of Cemmaes, and Nicholas Audley 

4 Gregory's Chronicle, 204. She was at Eccleshall about five miles 
distant. 

5 Gregory, 204. 



v] THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD 103 

Northampton was fought 1 ." Hall, in commenting on their 
release, says, " Such favour had the commons of Wales to 
the duke of York's band and his affinity that they could 
surfer no wrong to be done nor evil word to be spoken of 
him or his friends," a remark which is not void of truth 
when applied to Mid- Wales. 

Lord Stanley, whose influence in North Wales and Cheshire 
was considerable, set an example of gross double-dealing 
during this campaign. He had about two thousand men 
within six miles of Bloreheath when the fight was in progress. 
He afterwards excused himself to the queen for his dilatori- 
ness, and at the same time despatched a message to the earl 
of Salisbury thanking God for his success 2 . 

Roger Kynaston of Middle, Salop, Constable of Denbigh 
Roger for the duke of York (1454), and eulogised in 

Kynaston. contemporary Welsh poetry as a scion of the 

house of Powys, is said to have added lustre to the name 
under Salisbury's flag on that day ; and it is asserted that 
in honour of his deeds the Audley arms were inscribed on 
the Kynaston shield 3 . He was afterwards, at any rate, 

1 It has been supposed by some writers that Thomas Salesbury 
of Denbigh distinguished himself on that day. I can find no authority 
for it. A Roger Salesbury was made Chief Forester of Denbigh soon after 
the accession of the Yorkists to power (May, 1461). Thomas Salesbury 
the younger was made Constable of Denbigh in January, 1466. Cal. Pat. 
Rolls, 24, 421. Gregory, 204. Hall, 240. 

2 Rot. Pari. 369-370. On December 15, 1459, a pardon was granted 
" to William Stanley of Chester of ^166 on his petition showing that as 
late receiver of Richard duke of York, of the lordship of Denbigh, he was 
in arrears of ^278 of which he paid ^166 which is due to the king by the 
treason of the Duke of York, and remains in the hands of the tenants 
of the lordship and cannot be levied because the custom of Wales is that 
arrears due to any lord are wholly lost by the removal of the lord." Cal. 
Pat. Rolls, 570. 

3 Roger Kynaston was the son of Griffith Kynaston of Stokes and 
Margaret, daughter of Roger Hoord of Walford, Salop. He married 
Elizabeth, daughter of Lord Powys. Another son was Philip Kynaston 
of Walford, who married a daughter of Robert Corbet of Moreton, Salop. 

Others on the commission (July 10, 1453) were William Kynaston, 
John Hanmer, and Nicholas Eyton. Cal. Pat. Rolls (1452-1461). See 
also an Indenture in Ancient and Modern Denbigh, 91. On January 12, 
1459, Richard Grey, Lord Powys, was licensed to grant to him and others 
a moiety of a manor in Southampton. Ibid. 475. Lord Powys was a 
Yorkist at Ludford. See also Montgomery Collections, Vol. XV. 5. 



104 THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

a steady Yorkist, and may well have helped Salisbury in 
the fight. On the other hand, the queen had not at first 
distrusted him. For in July, 1453, when she was battling 
vigorously with the flames of disorder, he was associated 
with the stout Lancastrian John Hanmer on a commission 
" to bring certain people before the king's Council to answer 
certain charges." 

The earl of Salisbury reached Ludlow in safety after 
Bloreheath. A few days later he was joined by his son, 
the earl of Warwick, who, at the head of a well-disciplined 
body of veterans from the Calais garrison, had traversed 
the breadth of England unmolested. Edward, earl of March, 
eldest son of the duke of York, was also at Ludlow. So also 
were Lord Grey of Ruthin, Richard Grey (Lord Powys) 1 , 
and Sir Walter Devereux. In fact the duke of York had 
summoned hither the stoutest of his supporters, " that 
their coming together might make a mightier array 2 ." It 
appears from what immediately followed, however, that the 
response to his appeal was very disappointing. 

The Lancastrians, having concentrated at Worcester, 
The Yorkists marched on Ludlow with a numerous army, " for 
at Ludford every town hath waged and sent forth, and are 

ready to send forth, as many as they did when 
the King sent for them before the field of Ludlow 3 ." The duke 
of York took up an entrenched position at Ludford Bridge, in 
front of Ludlow, digging a deep ditch and fortifying it with 

1 They were attainted at Coventry. Devereux and Grey of Ruthin 
submitted the morning after Ludford. It is therefore not strictly true 
that, apart from the Nevilles, Lord Clinton was the only nobleman with 
the duke. 

Richard Grey (d. 1466) was the son of Henry Grey, earl of Tankerville 
(d. 1450) — this earldom lapsed with the loss of France — and Antigone, 
a natural daughter of Humphrey, duke of Gloucester. Henry Grey was 
the son of Sir John Grey, who was created earl of Tankerville by Henry VI 
(d. 1421) and Joan, daughter and co-heiress of Edward Charlton (d. 1421) 
the great-grandson of Sir John Charlton (d. 1353) who married the sister 
and heiress of Griffith de la Pole, Lord of Powys. Powysland Collections, 1. 
passim. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 121. 

2 Rot. Pari. v. 348. 

3 Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 168; "cum grandi comitatu." 
Paston Letters, 11. 4. 



v] THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD 105 

guns and stakes 1 . On October 9 the king was at Leominster. 
Next day the duke of York issued a manifesto protesting 
his loyalty to the king's person. He was already aware of 
his weakness. On previous occasions, notably in 1452 and 
1455, he had raised in the Marches a force sufficiently strong 
to overawe the Government ; yet now, in his own stronghold, 
reinforced by Salisbury's victorious contingent and Warwick's 
veterans, he could muster only " such as he had blinded and 
assembled by wages, promises, and other exquisite means." 
His " party was over- weak," says Gregory. He was so 
despondent that on the near approach of the enemy he 
" brought in certain persons before the people to swear 
that the king was deceased, doing mass to be said, and 
offering all, to make the people the less to dread to take 
the field 2 ." Henry offered a pardon to all who would join 
his standard within six days. On October 12, the two 
The rout, armies were posted one on each side of the 

12 Oct. 1459. Teme, and at dusk a few shots were exchanged. 
During the night the Yorkist force dissolved. Taking 
advantage of the royal pardon many deserted to the king, 
among them some of the troops brought by Warwick from 
Calais. Others fled under cover of darkness, including the 
Yorkist leaders. The duchess of York and her two youngest 
sons, George and Richard, became prisoners and were placed 
under the care of Anne, duchess of Buckingham, the duke 
of York's sister. " There was not so much a battle as 
a semblance of a battle 3 ." 

The duke, with his second son Edmund, earl of Rutland, 
" fled from place to place in Wales, and broke down the 
bridges so that the king's men should not come after 
them," and having ".bought a ship for much money, passed 
over to Ireland 4 ." When parliament met at Coventry on 

1 Gregory, 205. 

2 Rot. Pari. v. 348-9. Whethamstede, 1. 343. 

8 Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 168. Gregory, 205. English 
Chronicle, edit. Davies, 83. Rot. Pari. 348. Third Croyland Continuator 
453-4. Hearne's Fragment, 284. 

4 Gregory, op. cit. Polydore, 104. 



106 THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

November 20, it was as yet uncertain whether he had suc- 
ceeded in escaping the clutches of the pursuing Lancastrians. 
Salisbury, Warwick, and the duke of York's eldest son 
Edward, earl of March, fled to Calais. 

When the Lancastrians reached Ludlow " they drank 
enough of wine that was in taverns and other places, and 
full ungodly smote out the heads of the hogsheads of wine, 
that men went wet-shod in wine, and then they robbed 
the town and bare away bedding and other stuff 1 ." The 
morning after the calamity, Lord Grey of Ruthin submitted 
to the king ; also Walter Devereux, " and with him many 
knights and squires in their shirts and halters in their hands, 
falling before the king, and all had grace and mercy both 
of life and limb 2 ." 

The traditional view ascribes the rout of the Yorkists at 
Ludford to the sudden defection of the professional troops 
which, under the command of Andrew Trollope, had been 
brought over from Calais by Warwick. " That made 
the Duke full sore afraid when he wyste that sum olde 
soudyers went from him unto the kynge 3 ." The moral 
effect of the discipline of a few professional soldiers upon 
amateur retainers would be considerable. Wavering or 
defection on their part would have enormous influence, 
and might easily have provoked a rout. It is likely, too, 
that his father's contingent of Yorkshiremen would be 
particularly sensitive to the conduct of Warwick's veterans. 
So much must at once be admitted. 

But why should this abrupt and damaging treachery 
have occurred at this particular juncture ? The Croyland 
Continuator attributes it to the fact that Trollope had been 
deceived by Warwick into believing that they had been 
brought over to fight for the king. " For finding that 

1 Gregory, 207. Chronicle, edit. Davies, 83. 

2 This was Edmund Grey, afterwards earl of Kent ; " to the king's 
grete plesir," Paston Letters, 1. 500. Also Gregory, 207. For the close 
relationship between Devereux and the young earl of March, during the 
latter's residence at Ludlow, see Ellis's Letters, First Series, 1. No. 5. 

3 Gregory, 207. 



v] THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD 107 

contrary to their expectations they had really been brought 
to act against the king they left the duke 1 ." This explana- 
tion cannot be entertained with confidence ; for Trollope 
must have been well enough acquainted with the trend of 
party feud, and the unequivocal position of Warwick as 
a partisan of York, not to be deluded so easily. Two 
important contemporary writers pass by the defection in 
silence 2 ; most of them emphasise the weakness of the duke 
of York's own following. We shall probably not diverge far 
from the truth, therefore, if we ascribe both the defection 
and the rout to this primary cause, — the weakness of 
York. 

The abject expedients to which the duke resorted on 
the near approach of the royalists suggest very forcibly 
that the desertion was part of the general demoralisation 
which had been apparent for some time. Hitherto he had 
always found in the Marches an enthusiastic response to 
his appeals, and had relied upon them with complete assur- 
ance and security. Devereux and Lord Powys had, indeed, 
shown a tardy adherence, but the aloofness of Sir William 
Herbert was probably typical of the attitude of many others. 
This freezing apathy, where he had been wont to find such 
warm sympathy, was due to the foresight and assiduity of 
Margaret and Jasper during the three preceding years. 
The completeness of their triumph now was the measure of 
the success of their preliminary efforts there. 

The queen, during her frequent visits to the borders, had 
jasper Tudor's temporarily undermined the Mortimer influence 
movements. j n tfie Marches. Nor should we underrate 
the invaluable contribution of Jasper Tudor. His diligence 
in West Wales not only secured those parts for the 
Lancastrians, but also provided a force which threatened 
the Yorkists in the rear. His movements are no doubt 
obscure. There is no record of him till his arrival at the 

1 Third Croyland Continuator, 454. 

2 English Chronicle, edit. Davies. Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles. 



108 THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

Coventry parliament on December 6, a few weeks after 
Ludford. But he could hardly have been inactive while 
such great events were on the anvil. His force must have 
been advancing upon Ludlow from Pembroke while the 
king and queen attacked in front ; and we may reasonably 
argue that his was the army that went in pursuit of the duke 1 . 
If this was so, it accounts for two significant facts in the 
situation which have hitherto been neglected, namely, 
that Jasper did not appear in the parliament at Coventry 
till a fortnight after the opening of the session, and that 
he came there with a large following 2 . It is conceivable, 
and not at all improbable, that the Yorkists had become 
aware of his approach, and that this inspired them with 
additional fear, and increased their panic. 

Immediately after their triumph the king and queen had 
summoned a parliament at Coventry. Here the Yorkist 
leaders were attainted. Lord Powys and Sir Walter Deve- 
reux were spared their lives though their estates were con- 
fiscated; Richard Croft of Herefordshire and Roger Kynaston 3 
were pardoned. Among those attainted was Sir Thomas 
Vaughan 4 . Sir Walter Devereux had apparently been 
active gathering men for the duke of York ; for on November 
8, 1459, certain persons were indicted before Sir John 
Fortescue for having each received at Weobley 5 , Hereford- 
shire, " a gown of Walter Devereux contrary to the statute 
of liveries." He was bound to the king in 500 marks for 
his rebellion, which sum was paid to Humphrey, duke of 

1 Polydore, 104. Gregory. 

2 Paston Letters, I. 499, Dec. 7, 1459. " Yesterday in the mornyng 
came inne th' erle of Pembroke with a good feleschip." 

3 Rot. Pari., 368. Roger Kynaston, having " rered werre ayenst youre 
Highnes in the Feld of Luddeford," was pardoned, but fined. 

4 Paston Letters, I. 499. Chronicle, edit. Davies, 84. William Worces- 
ter, 771. Rot. Pari. 349, 368. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 536, 539. See a letter 
from the two sons of the duke of York to their father, written from 
Ludlow, complaining of Croft's " odious rule." Ellis's Letters, First Series, 
1. 9-10. 

5 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 531. Weobley was of course the home of Devereux. 
The date given is April 1, 1459. The activity of Devereux was therefore 
a few months before the Ludlow campaign. 



v] THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD 109 

Buckingham, " for his costs in attendance on the king in 
Kent and against other rebels 1 ." 

A glance at the grants bestowed by the Crown in the 
flush of victory will help us to understand who 

Sir William . J r 

Herbert's were its friends at this period. Of these the 

most prominent in Wales was unquestionably 
Sir William Herbert. And if we had no further proof of 
his Lancastrian proclivities, the favours showered upon him 
on this occasion should be sufficient. His reward was 
a grant for life of the offices of sheriff of the county of Gla- 
morgan and Morgannwg, steward of the lordship and its 
members 2 , steward of the lordships of Abergavenny, Elvel, 
Ewyas Lacy, Dinas, Usk, and Caerleon, and constable of 
Usk, " in the king's hands by the forfeiture of Richard, 
duke of York, and Richard, earl of Warwick." The grant 
was amplified in the following March, when he received power 
to appoint to all offices in these lordships 3 . 

Owen Tudor received an annuity of one hundred pounds 
W ei S h from certain manors in Kent and Surrey 4 , 

loyalists. ^ little later he was given the custody of Moel- 

wick and other parks in the lordship of Denbigh 5 . While 
the court was still at Coventry (12 Dec. 1459) Sir Henry 
Wogan esquire, and William ap Owen of Pembrokeshire, 
were commissioned to investigate the treasonable pro- 
ceedings of certain individuals in the lordship of Haver- 
fordwest 6 . Therefore, the Wogans who later became 

1 Ibid. 548, 552. 

2 Ibid. February 5, 1460. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls; ibid. 574, March 5, 1460. It appears from this 
entry that Sir William Herbert was already in possession of these offices in 
virtue of grants from York and Warwick. The fact only shows how skil- 
fully he had manoeuvred during these years of crisis. Sir Thomas Neville, 
a younger brother of the earl of Warwick, was sheriff of Glamorgan in 1451. 
Cardiff Records, 1. 51. 

4 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 532. Dec. 19, 1459. 

6 Rymer, 435. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 547. The date, February 5, 1460, was 
that on which Herbert received various offices in South Wales. 

6 The persons mentioned are Ievan ap Ievan Gadarn and David ap Rees 
ap Llywelyn. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 561. The entry gives additional proof of 
the success of Jasper in West Wales. 



no THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

enthusiastic Yorkists were so far supporters of Jasper and 
the king. John Owen was made steward and constable 
of Narberth, forfeited by the duke of York 1 . John Milewater 
was made receiver of the duke's lands in the Marches and 
Herefordshire, and of Warwick's lordship of Glamorgan 2 . 
John Middleton, " king's yeoman harbinger," became keeper 
of Cleobury Park, Salop, York's confiscated property 3 . 
Henry ap Griffith, who was amongst the Welsh squires 
pardoned by the queen in 1457, at the same time as Herbert, 
and who, like him, was on the Yorkist side at Mortimer's 
Cross, was given the stewardship of Ewyas Lacy 4 . Builth 
was reserved for the Prince of Wales, as well as Montgomery, 
Ceri, and Cedewain ; and he was also given 500 marks 
yearly out of the issues of Usk, Caerleon, Glamorgan, and 
Abergavenny, " to the intent that knights and squires may 
be retained with the king and prince, that the said lordships 
may be brought back the more speedily to the king's obedi- 
ence 5 ." Lastly, Nicholas ap Rees, " for his good service 
in the repression of the rebellion," was granted the office 
of rhaglaw of the lordship of Denbigh 6 . 

The arduous task of reducing the Marches to subjection 
had yet to be accomplished. Bands of rebels wandered 
through Wales inciting the people to rebellion, while the 
castle garrisons on York's estates refused to surrender. 
Consequently, frequent commissions were issued to bring 
the recalcitrant lordships to obedience, and to reduce the 
castles to the king's hands 7 . 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 585. May 29, 1460. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 530, 533. Dec. 13-18, 1459. 

3 Ibid. 548-9. Dec. 12, 1459. In the following February a 
general pardon was issued to a Sir John Middleton and his son John, and 
to Richard Middleton. 

4 Ibid. 554. March 22, 1460. Cf. ibid. (1453) 51. 

5 Ibid. 550. Feb. 5, 1460. These also were forfeited by the duke of 
York. Thomas Cornwall became steward of Radnor. 

6 Ibid. 543. Jan. 13, 1460. 

7 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 602-6. Among those appointed on commissions in 
Wales and the borders were Jasper Tudor, the duke of Buckingham, 
Sir John Skydmore, Thomas Cornwall, Richard Croft, Thomas ap Roger, 
Maurice ap Griffith, Thomas FitzHarry. 



v] THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD in 

Denbigh 1 offered a stubborn resistance to the victorious 
Denbigh. Lancastrians. Jasper may have begun the 

siege before leaving Wales for the Coventry parliament. 
On the rising of parliament, and having signed the oath of 
allegiance, he immediately repaired to Wales to extinguish 
this last flame of rebellion. Meanwhile, he had been appoin- 
ted constable of the castle and steward of the lordship 2 . 
At the end of seven weeks the garrison was still defiant. 
On February 22, Jasper was given a special commission 
with extensive powers to bring about its speedy reduction. 
When this had been done he was to hold the town " as 
of our gift," to take all the movable goods belonging to the 
garrison, and to distribute them according to his own 
discretion among the soldiers. Meanwhile he was assigned 
a force of men-at-arms and archers 3 , with full power to raise 
more troops in Wales, and to pardon or execute, the rebels, 
" and on the first approach of our first-born Prince Edward 
in Wales, to receive into our favour any rebels of the castle 
of Denbigh or outside, except certain English and Irish 
holding and defending the same castle against us ; except 
also certain Welshmen outlawed and attainted." These 
measures proved effective. The castle submitted before 
March 13 4 . On that day a special grant of £1000 was made 

1 Denbigh was given to Henry de Lacy, earl of Lincoln, by Edward I 
in 1284. He restored the castle or rebuilt it on a new site, for there is 
apparently a Norman motte three miles from Denbigh. Rhuddlan also was 
not on the site of the ancient motte. He parcelled the estate among vassals 
with the exception of a few manors. He died in 13 10. According to the 
Inqnis. postmortem, the lordship embraced Abergele, Rhuvoniog, Cymmerch , 
etc. The next lord was Thomas, earl of Lancaster, who married Alice Lacy. 
He was succeeded by Hugh Despenser, from whom it passed to Roger 
Mortimer. He was executed in 1 330. On his death, Denbigh was bestowed 
upon William de Montacute (d. 1344), but on the reversal of the Mortimers' 
attainder in 1356, it was restored to that family. By the marriage of 
Anne Mortimer (daughter of Roger Mortimer, earl of March, d. 1398) 
with Richard, earl of Cambridge, Denbigh passed to the duke of York, 
and thence to the Crown. See Ancient and Modem Denbigh, passim. It 
seems to be a unique instance of Lancastrian land not restored to Lan- 
caster. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 534. Jan. 5, 1460. 

3 Rymer, XI. 445. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 550, 565. 

4 Rymer, XI. 444-446. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 574-578. 



ii2 THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD [ch. 

on account of the expenses incurred in reducing the town 
and other places in Wales, the sum to be raised from the 
Welsh estates of the duke of York and the earl of Warwick. 
In April, Jasper was made a knight of the Garter in recog- 
nition of his splendid services. 

The Coventry parliament had to consider a novel petition 
from Wales 1 . It stated that in Chester, Flint, 

Official (I ' ' 

extortions and other counties in Wales great extortions 

and misprisions " were continually being done 
by the sheriffs and other royal officers " which have estate 
term of life in the said offices, and that the king's subjects 
dare not sue nor complain upon the said misdoers for the 
defaults as long as those men are in office." The petition 
was received sympathetically. Former petitions from Wales, 
almost without exception, were directed against Welshmen, 
and proceeded from the official element in town and shire. 
This petition, on the contrary, made direct reference to the 
" unjust exactions and cruelties of English officials in Wales." 
The voice of Wales was beginning to be heard, and it may 
not improbably have been due to the influence of Jasper 
Tudor, and to the assistance he had already received in 
Wales. 

It is instructive to compare with this petition a " precipe " 
of Richard, earl of Warwick, to his sheriff and officers in 
Glamorgan, saying that he had received complaints of official 
oppression of the abbots of Margam abbey by " certain 
of our bailiffs and ministers with a great multitude of men 
and horses 2 ." 

1 Rot. Pari. 366. Cf. Glamorgan Charters, 1618, March 24, 1450. Another 
petition, Robert Whitney of Hereford being one of the petitioners, appealed 
for more drastic action against lawlessness. Rot. Pari. 368, 1459-1460. 

2 Glamorgan Charters, loc. cit. 



v] 



THE CAMPAIGN OF LUDFORD 



"3 



APPENDIX. 

The Vaughans of Bredwardine. 
Sir William Walbeoffe 

Rosser Vawr m. Joyce 

I 
Roger Vaughan m. Jane, daughter and 
co-heiress of Ralph 
Baskerville 

Florence m. Walter Sais (temp. Edward III) 
heiress of 
Bredwardine 

Roger (Hen) m. dau. of Sir John 
I Devereux 

Gwladys m. Roger Vaughan 
dau. of David Gam. 
Her second husband 
was Sir William ap 
Thomas 



Watcyn Vaughan 
of Bredwardine 



Sir Roger Vaughan 
of Tretower 



Thomas ap Rosser 
slain at Banbury 



h 



Watkin Vaughan 
of Herast 



Thomas Vaughan 
I 

V 



Roger 
Vaughan 



Watcyn 
Vaughan 



Watkin 
Vaughan 



Richard 
Vaughan 

William 
Vaughan 



1 

Henry 

Vaughan 



Roger Vaughan 
of Clairow 



E. W. R. 



CHAPTER VI 

MORTIMER'S CROSS 

At Ludford Bridge the Yorkists received a short but 
rude shock. Nearly a year elapsed before their complete 
recovery. Meanwhile vague rumours were on the wing that 
a mysterious conference had taken place at Dublin, the vast 
import of which was not revealed till Warwick, Salisbury, 
and the earl of March landed at Sandwich, towards the end 
of June, 1460, and thence marched to London, which they 
reached on July 2nd. Warwick had risked a perilous voyage 
from Calais to the Irish capital to contrive this new scheme 
with the duke of York. 

Leaving his father, the earl of Salisbury, to blockade 
Battle of the Tower, Warwick advanced swiftly on 

Northampton. Northampton, then the Lancastrian head- 
quarters. Margaret was taken completely unawares and 
fled to Wales, trusting to the Lancastrian lords to do battle 
for the dynasty. On July 10, 1460, the battle of North- 
ampton was fought. The air was thick and dark with 
treason ; for hardly had the fight begun when Lord Grey 
of Ruthin 1 admitted the earl of March and the Yorkist 
vanguard into the royalist entrenchments. In the sordid 
annals of even these sterile wars there is no deed of shame 
so foul. The Lancastrians were overwhelmed. The duke 
of Buckingham, lord of Brecon, was among the slain. King 
Henry, a pitiable wreck, had to accompany Warwick to 
London. 

1 This lord was the murderer of Tresham in 1450. 



ch. vi] MORTIMER'S CROSS 115 

Queen Margaret, who had moved to Eccleshall, reached 
Cheshire in safety. " Beside the castle of 

Queen J 

Margaret Malpas a servant of her own 1 , that she had 

in Wales. 

made both yeoman and gentleman, and after- 
wards appointed to be in office with her son, the prince, 
spoiled her and robbed her and put her so in doubt of her 
life and her son's life also. And then she came to the castle 
of Harlech 2 in Wales, and she had many great gifts and was 
greatly comforted ; for she had need thereof, for she had 
a full easy many about her, the number of four persons 3 . 
And most commonly she rode behind a young poor gentleman 
of fourteen years of age. And there hence she removed full 
privily unto the Lord Jasper, lord and earl of Pembroke, 
for she durst not abide in no place that was open, but in 
private. 

" The cause was that counterfeit tokens were sent unto 
her as though they had come from her most dread lord the 
king, Henry VI ; but it was not of his sending, neither of 
his doing, but forged things ; for they that brought the 
tokens were of the king's house, and some of the prince's 
house, and some of her own house, and bade her beware 
of the tokens, that she gave no credence thereto. For at 
the king's departing from Coventry toward the field of 
Northampton he kissed her and blessed the prince, and 
commanded her that she should not come unto him till 
that he sent a special token unto her that no man knew 
but the king and she 4 ." 

With the assurance of one who had rendered his cause 
unquestionable service Warwick seized the government and 
immediately gave his attention to Wales and the Marches, 

1 William of Worcester, Annates, gives the name of " John Cleger, 
a servant of Lord Stanley," 773. 

2 See also English Chronicle edit. Davies, 98-9, which states that she 
was robbed of ten thousand marks. Stow, 409, and Chron. of the White 
Rose. 

3 " Eight," according to Eng. Chron. edit. Davies. 

4 Gregory 208-9. William of Worcester, Annates, 773-4. Eng. Chron. 
edit. Davies, 98-9. 

8—2 



n6 MORTIMER'S CROSS [ch. 

the vital importance of which had been forced upon him 
in the campaign of the preceding autumn. 

Warwick's r ? . r . ~° 

activity in In July commissions were issued to Walter 

Devereux, Henry Griffith, and Richard Croft in 
Herefordshire, and to Roger Kynaston, Corbet, and others 
in Shropshire 1 . A fortnight afterwards Devereux was com- 
manded to seize Thomas Fitzharry 2 . Acting through the 
Privy Council, the earl of Warwick called upon Jasper Tudor, 
earl of Pembroke, and Roger Puleston, his deputy at Denbigh, 
to surrender that fortress to the duke of York's nominee, 
at the same time assuring them of his belief in the loyal 
intentions of the duke 3 . The constables of Beaumaris, 
Conway, Flint, Hawarden, Holt, and Ruthin, were directed 
to provide for the safety of those places. This precaution 
may have been considered especially important in view of 
the fact that the duke of York would soon be returning 
from Ireland. Also Richard Grey, Lord Powys, who had 
submitted to Henry VI after Ludford, was enjoined to 
surrender Montgomery castle to Warwick's nominee, Edward 
Bourchier 4 . Policy dictated that such wavering allegiance 
as that of Lord Powys should not be sheltered in so im- 
pregnable and advantageous a fort. 

Sir Walter Devereux was similarly circumstanced 5 . He 
sir waiter had acted with the Yorkists in the recent 
Devereux. campaign and had been attainted at Coventry. 

Both had escaped the full penalties of treason. Yet on the 
return of the Yorkists to power Devereux was admitted 
to their confidence, while Lord Powys was visited with 
disfavour. It is conceivable that the indulgence shown to 
Walter Devereux was in some measure due to Herbert. 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 607, 608. July 28. 

2 Ibid. August 13, 612. 

8 Proceedings, vi. 303. Aug. 9, 1460. 

* In the records the name is given incompletely as " Edward Bou — ." 
Probably Edward Bourchier is intended. He was a son of Viscount 
Bourchier, earl of Essex, and Isabel, daughter of Richard, earl of Cambridge. 
He was slain at Wakefield, 1460. Proceedings, vi. 303. 

5 Rot. Pari. 38 Henry VI, 349. 



vi] MORTIMER'S CROSS 117 

For, in the course of the year 1459-60, Herbert had married 
Anne Devereux, sister of Walter 1 . This was a stroke of 
address in that the Yorkists may have regarded it as the 
first link which bound the fortunes of Herbert afresh to those 
of the duke of York, while Margaret may easily have inter- 
preted it as a step towards the complete reconciliation of 
Devereux with the Lancastrians. As late as June, 1460, 
William Herbert was a reputed Lancastrian ; for, while the 
king was at Coventry, almost on the eve of the battle of 
Northampton, a further bond of union was effected be- 
tween Herbert and the court party 2 . Unlike Sir Walter 
Devereux, he had veiled his own political intentions in such 
mysterious secrecy that he was able to shield his brother- 
in-law from the consequences of his apostacy as well with 
the Yorkists as with the Lancastrians. 

Yet, when the moment for an irretrievable decision came, 
Herbert ^ William Herbert struck boldly. Family 

becomes associations, fear, ambition, stratagem, the 

slender thread upon which hung the royalist 
hopes, everything conspired to urge him to throw aside his 
Lancastrian weeds. His transitory association with that 
party had been elusive, though sufficient to humour Mar- 
garet without alienating York. He had steered his craft 
skilfully between the rival sirens of faction. The new 
situation which was created by the overwhelming victory 
of the Yorkists at Northampton offered him boundless 
scope, and a rare opportunity which he seized with prompti- 
tude, and pursued with an intrepidity all his own. 

Two circumstances now favoured his rise to eminence. 
The death of the duke of Buckingham at Northampton left 
the lordship of Brecon in the hands of a minor, Henry 
Stafford, whose father Humphrey, the duke's son and heir, 
had been slain at St Albans in 1455 ; this removed from 

1 Doyle's Baronage. " Before July, 1460." Sir Walter Devereux was 
the first Lord Ferrers of Chartley. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 594. June 26, 1460. Thomas Herbert was associated 
with his brother on this occasion. 



n8 MORTIMER'S CROSS [ch. 

Herbert's neighbourhood the most considerable Lancastrian 
in the Marches. If the duke had lived, Herbert would have 
found himself between the hammer and the anvil — Bucking- 
ham at Brecon, and Warwick at Cardiff. The removal of 
the one and the favour of the other enabled him to extend 
his influence in South-east Wales just as the attainder of 
Jasper, at a later period, brought him to Pembroke. The 
other circumstance was the proximity of Herbert's patrimony 
to Warwick's lordship of Glamorgan. It enhanced his value 
to the earl as an ally. 

Warwick was the first to appreciate his supple genius 
as a most formidable asset in Wales. Whether 

The earl of 

Warwick and aware or not of his Lancastrian leanings during 

Herbert. _ . ° . . . . 

the Ludford campaign, he now gave him his 
unqualified confidence. He gave him priority even over 
Sir Walter Devereux. He threw upon him, primarily, the 
responsibility for the loyalty of South Wales, a task in which 
his Welsh birth gave him an advantage over Devereux. 
On August 17 Warwick, through the Privy Council, gave 
William Herbert, Walter Devereux, and Roger Vaughan 
authority to prevent all unlawful assemblies, arrest all such 
persons as should, in defiance of the king's commands, 
attempt to victual or fortify castles, towns, or strongholds 
in Wales, and adopt adequate measures for the safe custody 
of those castles, until they received further instructions. 
The trend of the letter leaves no doubt that Herbert and his 
associates were vested with absolute and practically un- 
limited powers of raising troops and extinguishing the 
embers of rebellion in South Wales. It is a curious document 
when we bear in mind that Herbert at that moment held 
as a gift from Margaret certain offices in Warwick's Welsh 
dominions 1 : 

1 Proceedings, vi. 304-5. In Paston Letters, I. 538, there is reference 
to a " Richard Harbard " who was evidently familiar with the Pastons 
and at the time (Oct. 29, 1460) in communication with Warwick. But 
there is nothing to show conclusively whether the brother of William 
Herbert or some other of the name is intended. He may have been the 



vi] MORTIMER'S CROSS ng 

" To Sir William Herbert, Walter Devereux and Roger 
Vaughan. We have understande by audible reporte made 
unto us nowe late how that divers persons without our will 
or commandement and expressly contrary to our laws and 
place usurp and take upon them to victual and fortify divers 
castles, places, and strengths in our country of Wales and 
over make great assemblies, routes and gaderyng of people 
in riotous wise whereby, unless than it were soon purveyed 
for the ceasing thereof great hurt and inconvenience is 
like to ensue both to our said countrie of Wales, and to all 
this our land. Wherefore we straightly charge you and each 
of you and give you full authority and power that in all 
possible haste after the sight hereof ye putte you in effectual 
devoir and diligence by all ways and means possible to you 
to repress and subdue all those persons — not only letting 
them of their purpose in that behalf, but also putting such 
as are the leaders, principal doers, and stirrers of them 
in sure hold and keeping, so to remain and dwell till further 
knowledge from us — unless ye can without danger or peril 
bring or send them to us — the which if ye may we will 
ye do so — and ye take all manner such castles unto our 
hands and surely keep them to our use till we have ordained 
otherwise. Besides we command all sheriffs, mayors, 
bailiffs, constables, etc. — to assist you, and that ye and they 
and none of you fail herein as our perfect trust is in you 
and as ye desire to be recommended of good and diligent 
obeissance and to stand in our especial favour and have 
singular thanks of us." 

In the beginning of September the duke of York landed 
at Redcliffe in Lancashire 1 . On previous journeys his 

Richard Heberd mentioned in another letter, the date of which is not 
established ; ibid. i. 76. Apparently the only other person of the name 
Herberd or Harbard mentioned in this correspondence is Julian Herberd 
of Thornham (March 1, 1426) and one " of my iii adversaries " ; ibid. I. 26. 

1 Gregory 208. The Paston correspondent was under the belief that 
York had landed at Chester. Paston Letters, 1. 525-6. Oct. 12, 1460. 
" My lord of York hath dyvers straunge commissions fro the kyng for to 
sitte in dyvers townys comyng homeward ; that is for to sey, in Ludlow, 



120 MORTIMER'S CROSS [ch. 

route had been through North Wales. The change was 
The duke of a reflex of his bitter experiences during the 
York returns. previous autumn. Wales was still more insecure 
now, for Denbigh was in the hands of Jasper Tudor's lieu- 
tenant, Roger Puleston, and probably harboured some 
Lancastrian refugees. Realising the insecurity of his hold 
on the affections of the Marches the duke of York traversed 
the borders leisurely and cautiously, holding sessions at 
Shrewsbury, Ludlow, and Hereford, where he was to be 
joined by the duchess. Having confirmed the loyalty of 
these parts he marched on London, and reached the city 
on October 9th, accompanied by a strong bodyguard of 
Welshmen from his estates in the Marches 1 . 

Parliament had already assembled, Sir William Herbert 
being member for Hereford 2 . To the amazement of the 
lords the duke of York laid claim to the throne. Friendly 
representations, in which the earl of Warwick played a 
prominent part, convinced him of the unpopularity and 
unwisdom of the step. He therefore agreed that Henry 
should be king during his lifetime, and that he should 
succeed him. York therefore became Protector. The Prin- 
cipality of Wales was assigned to him. When parliament 
was dissolved he left London for his Yorkshire estates, on 
December 9th. Warwick remained in London. York's 
eldest son, the earl of March, came to the Marches of Wales 
to raise forces. 

On October 12, Queen Margaret and her son were still 
in Wales. The duke of Exeter was with her with a good 
following 3 . Her headquarters were probably Pembroke, 
whence she sailed to Scotland 4 . 

Shrewsbury, Herford, Leycestre, Coventre." See also William of 
Worcester, Annales, 774. 

1 Waurin, 312, which states that York sent to many of the Welsh chief- 
tains for help and came up to London with a large following of Welshmen. 

2 He was summoned in October, 1460. 

3 Pastnn Letters, I. 525-6. 

4 William of Worcester, 774. Gregory 208-9. Ramsay, Lancaster and 
York, 11. 236, states that Margaret moved from Harlech to Denbigh, but 
the authorities quoted do not warrant the statement. 



vi] MORTIMER'S CROSS 121 

The most explicit statement as to her movements in 
Lancastrian Wales comes from Gregory, who says that she 
movements. moved to Jasper, lord of Pembroke. Denbigh 
had been reduced by the Lancastrians since March, 1459, 
but Jasper Tudor made Tenby and Pembroke his headquar- 
ters. From Pembroke Margaret could sail to Scotland more 
conveniently than if she had been at Denbigh. Before 
sailing she had sent urgent messages to Somerset and Devon 
to join her as speedily as possible " with their tenants as 
strong in their harness as men of war 1 ." It was reported 
that the great muster was to be in Wales 2 , but the activity 
of the queen's friends in the north of England drew the duke 
of Somerset and the earl of Devon thither. They passed 
through Bath, Cirencester, Evesham, and Coventry on their 
journey northwards, but did not touch the Welsh border 3 . 
Apparently Margaret intended Yorkshire to be the venue of 
the next campaign, for she hoped to bring reinforcements 
from Scotland 4 . Jasper Tudor was to remain in Wales. 

While Margaret was recuperating in Scotland the duke 
of York was attacked by her northern suppor- 

Battles of J rr 

wakefieid ters with disastrous promptitude at Wakefield. 

There, on December 30, his army was annihi- 
i7 n Fe S b.f46 b i ans lated, and he himself put to death. Next 

morning the earl of Salisbury was beheaded. 
Seven weeks later, on February 17, Margaret with an army 
of " Scots, Welsh, and Northmen 5 " defeated Warwick at 
St Albans and put him to flight with a remnant of 
his host. 

Such in brief are two of the acts of this drama of feud, 
Mortimer's which were enacted in the winter 1460-146 1. 
Cross - The third, and the most decisive, took place 

1 Gregory, 209. 

2 Paston Letters, 1. 525-6. " Theyseythe here he (the duke of Somerset) 
propose hym to go to Walys to the Queen." 

8 William of Worcester, 774-5 ; " cum multis militibus et generosis de 
partibus occidentalibus." 

4 Gregory, 209. Stowe. 

5 Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 155. Brief Notes. 



122 MORTIMER'S CROSS [ch. 

on the borders of Wales, at Mortimer's Cross. Let us 
consider it. 

News of his father's death at Wakefield reached young 
, . Edward, earl of March, at Gloucester 1 . He 

The earl of ' 

March's thereupon set about gathering an army in the 

Marches and the border counties, and was soon 
at the head of a numerous host. He had been well 
acquainted with the borders from his boyhood, having been 
under the tutelage of Richard Croft of Herefordshire. He 
was a lusty youth of nineteen, but he had not yet organised 
a campaign in person, although he had taken a prominent 
part at Northampton. He was now the chief of the 
Yorkist faction, and under his standard Wales wrote her- 
self in capital letters. 

Of Edward's lieutenants and advisers the most con- 
The Welsh spicuous were Sir William Herbert, Sir Walter 
Yorkists. Devereux (Lord Ferrers of Chartley) and Sir 

Roger Vaughan 2 , the three who had been collectively 
commissioned to look after Yorkist interests in Wales in 
the previous August ; and of these the recognised chief 
was Herbert. To him, who had an end in view and an eye 
to means, the fact that Edward was heir to the title and 

1 William of Worcester, Annates, 775-6. Three Fifteenth Century 
Chronicles, 76. English Chronicle, edit. Davies 203, states that Edward 
received news of his father's death at Gloucester, and then moved to 
Shrewsbury. The Annates put him at Shrewsbury. 

2 William of Worcester, Itinerarium, 328, gives him a knighthood. 
I can see no evidence to show when he had been knighted. In addition 
to those given in the text, the same authority mentions the following as 
being with Edward at Mortimer's Cross — " Stafford, Dom. Audley, Reg. 
Gray, Sir John Skydmore, Sir Wm. Skydmore, Sir Morys Skydmore, fratres, 
milites in armis in Francia." This Stafford may have been Humphrey 
Stafford of Southwick, son of that William Stafford who was killed during 
Cade's rising in 1450, and who, at the coronation of Edward IV, was raised 
to the peerage as Lord Stafford of Southwick. There is a good deal of 
confusion about the Skydmores. Sir John and Sir William are given 
in the list of prominent Lancastrians as well. Sir John Skydmore held 
Pembroke Castle for Jasper and could not have been among the Yorkists. 
We may safely dismiss these three brothers from William of Worcester's 
list. Philip Vaughan of Hay is described as " homo guerrae in Francia, 
nobilior armiger lanceatus inter omnes alios, fuit occisus apud obsidium 
castri de Harlaugh per librillam et nullus homo honoris occisus ibidem 
praeter ipsum." 



vi] MORTIMER'S CROSS 123 

pretensions of Richard, duke of York, appealed with tremen- 
dous force. To be associated with his prospective sovereign 
in his first campaign, and to turn that campaign into a 
triumph, was an alluring prospect for future eminence. He 
therefore threw himself with inflexible resolution into the 
task. He and Walter Devereux were men of experience. 
Both had served in the French wars, Herbert under the 
most daring and consistently successful captain of his day 
in France, Mathew Gough. What was more important for 
the enterprise then being forged, both were familiar with 
the turbid politics of the Marches. Moreover, Herbert and 
Roger Vaughan especially could appeal with effect to Welsh 
sentiment, which was never more intense or more general 
than in the second half of the fifteenth century. With them 
were William Herbert's brother Richard, Henry ap Griffith, 
Philip Vaughan captain of Hay, William Thomas, John 
Dwnn, and three knights from Herefordshire, viz., Sir 
Richard Croft, Sir John Lynell and Sir W 7 illiam Knylle 1 . 
In a letter written a few weeks after the engagement Jasper 
Tudor attributes his reverse to " March, Herbert, and the 
Dwnns 2 ." 

It will thus be seen that the forces of Edward, earl of 
March, in this campaign were drawn mainly from what 
are now the shires of Glamorgan, Brecknock, Monmouth, 
Radnor, and Montgomery, and the border county of Hereford. 
Lord Audley, the son of him who was slain on the Lancastrian 
side at Bloreheath, is also mentioned as having been with 
Edward. He had estates in Cemmaes, Pembrokeshire ; 
but as Jasper, earl of Pembroke, was gathering fuel for war 
in these parts, it is hardly possible that Audley could have 
sought material there. He had been taken prisoner by the 
earl of Warwick in Calais after the panic of Ludford, had 
crossed the Channel with him in June 1460, and was with 
the Yorkists at Northampton. He may therefore have 

1 William of Worcester, Itinerarium. 

1 See a letter from Jasper to Koger Puleston, given later. 



124 MORTIMER'S CROSS [ch. 

accompanied the earl of March to the borders of Wales at 
Christmas. 

Against this compact, homogeneous force, the Lan- 
The castrians brought a motley body of Welsh, 

Lancastrian Irish, French and Bretons, under the leadership 

forces. T 

of Jasper, earl of Pembroke, and the earl of 
Wiltshire and Ormond (James Butler) 1 . With them were 
Jasper's father, old Owen Tudor 2 , Sir John Skydmore, who 
had a personal bodyguard of thirty men 3 ; Sir Thomas Perot 
of Haverfordwest ; two of the sons of Griffith ap Nicholas, 
Owen and Thomas ; Lewis ap Rhys of Carmarthen ; Philip 
Mansel and Hopkin ap Rhys of Gower ; Rheinallt Gwynedd 
of Harlech ; Lewis Powys of Powysland ; Hopkin Davy 
of Carmarthen ; Thomas Fitzharry ; James Skydmore and 
Sir Harry Skydmore, sons of Sir John Skydmore ; Sir 
William Skydmore, his brother 4 . 

If we except the Hereford contingent these men were 
drawn mainly from Pembrokeshire and Carmarthenshire. 
There was also a large body of foreigners who came by sea, 
and who formed the bulk of the Lancastrian army. At least 
they were so numerous that one contemporary chronicler 
makes no mention whatever of the Welsh contingent 5 . 



1 Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 76, describes the army as " French- 
men and Bretons and Irishmen " who came by sea. Engl. Chron. edit. 
Davies, no, describes them indiscriminately as " Walsshemen." 

2 " Who had been dragged from a seclusion of three and twenty years 
to do battle for the dynasty " — an unfortunate gloss in Ramsay. Lancaster 
and York, II. 243. As we have already seen, Owen Tudor had left his 
seclusion before this. 

3 William of Worcester, Itinerarium, 328, whence the list is taken. 
Skydmore had endeavoured to recoup himself for his losses in the French 
Wars by exporting tin. Record Reports, July 30, 1455-6. He was 
reckoned the most influential knight in Herefordshire. Proceedings, vi. 341. 

4 William of Worcester, Itinerarium, 327—8. 

5 Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 76— 77. It is there stated that 
Wiltshire was present at Wakefield. It is difficult to reconcile these 
assertions. So also Hall, 250. If he was at Wakefield there was no need 
for him to have come by sea to join Jasper in Wales. Moreover, it is 
impossible that he could have transferred an army by such a circuitous 
route in less than five weeks (Dec. 31-Feb. 2). A short time previously 
he had been in Ireland stirring up Irish opposition to Yorkist rule. Chro- 
nicle, edit. Davies, 87, seq. 



vi] MORTIMER'S CROSS 125 

These Irish, French, and Bretons were probably the re- 
inforcements brought by the earl of Wiltshire, unless we may 
suppose, what is quite feasible, and actually suggested by 
Lewis Glyn Cothi, that Jasper himself had left for Ireland 
and perhaps for France, when Margaret sailed for Scotland 1 . 

Moreover, it is suggested by Lewis Glyn Cothi that 
Jasper landed at Milford Haven about December 27. If so, 
there arises a strong presumption that his attack from 
Wales and that of his allies from the north were timed to 
take place simultaneously ; for the battle of Wakefield 
was fought on December 30. 

The most probable conclusion from the few fragments 
jasper Tudor-s °f records that are available seems to be that, 
march. while Jasper mustered his supporters in Wales, 

the earl of Wiltshire, having enlisted troops on his Irish 
estates and abroad, landed in Wales, probably at Milford 
Haven 2 ; that the combined force, moving up the valley 
of the Towy, passed through Radnorshire, and, having 
reached Presteign, which is about seven miles from Aymestrey, 
followed the valley of the Lugg in the direction of Leominster. 
But they found their further progress barred by the Yorkists 
at Mortimer's Cross. This route would serve to explain the 
predominance of the levies of Carmarthenshire and Pembroke- 
shire. The earl of Wiltshire was sheriff of the former county 
as well as of Cardiganshire 3 . It should be remembered, more- 
over, that some time previously he had fitted out a fleet 
of five ships at Genoa, with which to act against the Yorkists ; 
and, having been appointed captain to guard the sea in 
April, 1454, he was presumably in command of a fleet 4 . 

1 Lewis Glyn Cothi, viii. i. seq. 

2 I have already shown in the first chapter that Lewis Glyn Cothi was 
aware that Jasper had gone abroad to seek reinforcements and that he 
would land at Milford Haven about the end of December (the Feast of 
St John). See ibid. vm. i., iii., iv. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 1442. 

* Rot. Pari. v. 244. Carte's Life of Ormond, Vol. 1. lxxx. He was 
lord-deputy of Ireland in 1451, in the absence of the duke of York. See 
Ellis, Letters, Second Series, 1. 117 ; it refers to the activity of the Wogans 
in Ireland. 



126 MORTIMER'S CROSS [ch. 

In short, the Lancastrian plan of campaign was a repetition 
of what we conceive to have been their strategy during the 
manoeuvres which culminated at Ludford. 

Edward, earl of March, was advancing eastwards when 
The battle of he heard of the Lancastrian advance in his rear. 
CroM, merB -^ e t urne d to meet them, advancing probably 
2 Feb. 1461. from Hereford and Leominster towards Pres- 

teign 1 . The two armies came face to face at Mortimer's 
Cross on the Lugg, about six miles north-west of Leominster, 
on February 2, 1461 2 . About ten o'clock on the morning 
of the day of battle a strange portent was seen in the heavens ; 
for " there were seen three suns in the firmament shining 
full clear, whereof the people had great marvel, and thereof 
were aghast. The noble earl Edward them comforted and 
said, — ' Be of good cheer and dread not ; this is a good 
sign 3 .' ' Another reports " a shower of rain of the colour 
of blood," as well as a three-fold sun 4 . 

The Yorkists, who considerably outnumbered their 
opponents 5 , obtained the victory, and a large number of 
the Lancastrians were slain. Jasper Tudor and the earl 
of Wiltshire stole away in disguise ; and Sir John Perot also 
made good his escape 6 . 

1 Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles. 76-77. 

2 This is the date given by Gregory, 211. He places the portent on 
the same day. Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 77, also states that 
the portent and action occurred on the same day, though " Sunday, 
Candlemas Day," which was February 1, is self-contradictory. English 
Chronicle, edit. Davies, iio-m, gives February 3, and places the atmo- 
spheric phenomenon on the day before the battle, Monday. William of 
Worcester, Annates, 775, gives February 3. 

3 English Chronicle, edit. Davies, no. " By the morrow appeared 
the sun as three suns sundry on him in the east and closed again together." 
Gregory says that the Yorkists were mustered " withoute the towne wallys 
in a mersche that ys callyd Wyg mersche " ; i.e. Wigmore, which is a few 
miles to the north. 

* Whethamstede. 6 William of Worcester, Annates, 776. 

6 Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 77. I find no contemporary 
authority for Ramsay's statement that they were pursued as far as Hereford. 
Lancaster and York, 11. 243. On the contrary, considering the directions 
along which the two forces respectively were moving, the Lancastrians 
were pursued, if at all, towards Presteign and the Welsh border. It was 
reported that Pembroke was taken near Nottingham. Brief Notes, in 
Three F. C. C. 155. Itinerarium. 



vi] MORTIMER'S CROSS 127 

Owen Tudor was among the prisoners who were taken 
Death of to Hereford and there put to death. It is 

Owen Tudor. g^ fa^ h e was brought to the place of execu- 
tion by his countryman Sir Roger Vaughan 1 . " And he 
was beheaded in the market-place, and his head set upon 
the highest grise of the market cross ; and a mad woman 
combed his hair and washed away the blood of his face. 
And she got candles and set about him burning, more than 
a hundred. This Owen Tudor was the father unto the 
earl of Pembroke and had wedded Queen Catherine, King 
Henry VI's mother, weening and trusting all the time that 
he should not be beheaded, till he saw the axe and the block ; 
and when that he was in his doublet he trusted on pardon 
and grace till the collar of his red velvet doublet was ripped 
off. Then he said, — That head shall lie on the stock that 
was wont to lie on Queen Catherine's lap ; and put his heart 
and mind wholly unto God, and full meekly took his death." 
He was buried in the chapel of the Grey Friars in Hereford 2 . 

Owen Tudor typifies that spirit of adventure and chivalry 
which in the fifteenth century sent Welshmen abroad to 
win fame on the battlefields of Europe or in the courts of 
princes. He carried to the grave that intrepidity and 
dignified bearing which had characterised him in life. But 
he mistook the age, not indeed in which he had lived, but 
in which he was to die. The age of chivalry was passing by 
and giving way to the ungovernable passions and truculent 
savagery of meaner days. Owen Tudor bridges the two ; he 
lived in the one, and died in the other. 



1 That is, if we may identify him with the Sir Richard Vaughan of 
Stow, 377, quoted in Proceedings, v. Intro, xix. 

2 Gregory, 211. Stow. The bard Robin Ddu makes a touching allusion 
to the death of Owen and then turns his hopes to Jasper, whom he styles 
Owen, and refers to as : 

Draig wen ddibarch yn gwarchae, 
A draig goch a dyr y cae. 

Ceinion Llenyddiaith Gymreig, 219. 
" The dishonourable white dragon has triumphed, 
But the red dragon will yet win the field." 
It is interesting once more to note the play on " red " and " white." 



128 MORTIMER'S CROSS [ch. 

It has been supposed that eight other captains were 
put to death at Hereford with Owen Tudor 1 . It can be 
shown, however, that the lists of the chroniclers are in- 
accurate in many respects. It is certain that there escaped 
several of those whose names are given as having been either 
beheaded or captured. For instance, Phillip Mansel, Hopkyn 
ap Rhys of Gower, and Lewis ap Rhys of Strata Florida 
were in the field again a few years after these events ; 
Sir John Skydmore subsequently held Pembroke castle 
against Sir William Herbert, and must have made good his 
escape ; the two sons of Griffith ap Nicholas also found 
safety in flight 2 . 

The battle aroused even less interest in Wales than in 
England. There are but few references to it in the poets. 
In one of his odes Howel Swrdwal alludes to an important 
fight in Herefordshire, in which Watcyn Vaughan of Bred- 
wardine was slain. He may have Mortimer's Cross in mind, 

1 William of Worcester, Annates, 776. " Ac Owenus Tedere et Johan- 
nes Throgmertone, armiger, cum aliis captaneis decollati sunt apud 
Herforde." In the Itinerarium, 327, the same chronicler gives the following 
list of captured : 

Owen Tudor, about fifty age years of, beheaded. 

Reginaldus Gwyneth, camerarius Gwynneth landes jacente prope 
castrum Harlegh, beheaded. 

Master Lewis Powes, armiger, de Powesland, beheaded. 

Hopkyn Davy, Carmarthenshire, arm. cum comite Pembroke, be- 
headed. 

Philip Mansell, armiger, v mark annui valoris de Gowerland, 
beheaded. 

Lewis ap Rhys, armiger of Carmarthenshire, beheaded. 

Thomas Fitzharry, jurisperitus. 

Hopkyn ap Rhys of Gowerland comitatu, de Carmarthen, beheaded. 

James Skydmore, occisus, son of Sir John Skydmore. 

Sir Harry Skydmore of Herefordshire, son of the same Sir John 
Skydmore, beheaded. 

Sir William Skydmore, brother of John Skydmore, militis, obiit in . . . 

Sir John Skydmore, chevalier. 
Stow, 413, gives the following as having been taken and beheaded. 
David Lloyd, Morgan ap Rhydderch, Sir John Skydmore and two sons, 
Thomas Griffith (? Thomas ap Griffith ap Nicholas), John Throgmorton, 
Thomas Fitzharry, and another. Both lists are somewhat inaccurate. 
See text. 

2 Hall, 252, copying Stow, says that David Lloyd and Morgan ap 
Rhydderch were put to death. David Lloyd was probably the same who, 
for his services in the French wars, was made a royal official in the Forest 
of Glyn Cothi, Carmarthenshire ; March 20, 1444. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 259. 



vi] MORTIMER'S CROSS 129 

but there is nothing to prove it 1 . But the very paucity 
of allusions to the fight shows how little the country generally 
was moved so far by the quarrel between the factions. 

A spurious tale gained currency in later years with regard 
Griffith to Griffith ap Nicholas and his son Owen, which 

ap Nicholas. it wou \^ be aDSU rd to notice but that responsible 
writers have given credence to it. It has been stated that 
Griffith brought to Mortimer's Cross a force of seven or eight 
hundred followers to assist the Yorkists, men " well-armed, 
goodly of stature, and hearts answerable thereto." When he 
received a mortal wound his second son Owen stood at the 
head of his troops and pursued Jasper. When he returned 
to acquaint his father of the victory the latter exclaimed 
" Welcome death, since honour and victory make for us 2 ." 
As has already been said a vein of unreality runs through 
the whole biography ; and its details cannot stand the 
limelight of historical criticism 3 . Griffith is not mentioned 
by any contemporary chronicler, though many Welshmen of 
far less distinction are named. His sons are recorded, but 
on the Lancastrian side. If the family had accomplished 
the deeds attributed to them they would probably have found 
their reward on the accession of Edward IV, as did, for 
instance, their neighbours, the Dwnns of Carmarthenshire 4 . 

1 A diwedd braint, a dydd brawd 

Yn Henffordd, mawr yw'n hanffawd. Howel Swrdwal. 
" The day of judgment and the end came in Herefordshire. 
Great is our distress." Ode to Watcyn Vaughan. 
Watcyn Vaughan was the son of Roger Vaughan and Gwladys. 
Swrdwal has been published by the Bangor Welsh MSS. Society. 

2 Life of Sir Rhys ap Thomas, in the Cambrian Register. 

3 Lewis Glyn Cothi refers to Griffith at an earlier period as one of the 
" party of the lily," an allusion to the fleur de lis of Margaret. Deio ap 
Ieuan Hen also has a reference to the lily in a poem to Sion ap Rhys of 
Glyn Neath : 

Tri fflowr de Us gedwis gwart, 
Maes hyder grymus Edwart. 
This is the poem which contains the Welsh motto : 

Y ddraig goch ddyry gychwyn. 
The poem of Gwilym ap Ieuan Hen entitled " Cywydd i ddau Gar- 
charor," may possibly refer to the retreat of Owen and Henry ap Gwilym 
to Harlech at this time. Gorchestion Beirdd Cymru, 156, 170—2. 

4 The Dwnns are generally known as the Dwnns of Kidwely, where 
they obtained an official status later. 



130 MORTIMER'S CROSS [ch. 

As a matter of fact Griffith had probably been dead a couple 
of years. There is no mention of him in authentic records, 
local or general, after 1456. Moreover, though his two sons, 
Owen and Thomas, were mentioned in 1459 as assisting 
the Tudors against the Dwnns, Griffith himself is not men- 
tioned 1 . 

Soon after his victory Edward was given a commission 
by the Privy Council to raise fresh levies in 

Edward and ■* J 

Warwick Bristol and the border counties 2 , he having 

meet. . . ° 

in the meantime moved on to Gloucester 3 . It 
was on the day on which Edward received his commission that 
Warwick moved from London to St Albans, accompanied 
by the king, to meet the hosts of Margaret which were then 
advancing on the city. As already stated, the earl was defeated 
by the Lancastrians on February 17, and, having escaped 
westwards with the remnants of his army, met Edward 
five days later at Chipping Norton 4 , or at Burford 5 , in 
Oxfordshire. Edward was now accompanied by William 
Hastings and John Wenlok, who must have joined him 
after the battle at Mortimer's Cross ; for they are not 
reported to have been present at that action. 

Margaret apparently had begun her southward march 

before news of Tasper's defeat had reached her. 

Why Edward u r 

delayed in Warwick may have received information of her 

the J^cirches 

approach on January 28, the day on which 
commissions were issued in the king's name to noblemen 
and sheriffs to raise troops 6 . She was at St Albans before 
Edward had left the Marches. Edward, who was at the 
head of a more amenable following than the queen's in- 
toxicated host, must have surmised that the Lancastrians, 

1 A Griffith Nicholas appears as farmer of Dynevor, 1 485-1 490, but 
he cannot be the same person. Ministers' Accounts. See West Wales 
Historical Society's Transactions. 

2 Rymer, xi. 471, February 12, 1461. Three Fifteenth Century Chro- 
nicles, 77. " And forthwith he made again ready in the march." 

8 William of Worcester, Annales, 777. 

* Ibid. 

6 Gregory, 215. 

6 Proceedings, vi. 307-310. English Chronicle, edit. Davies, 107. 



vi] MORTIMER'S CROSS 131 

in the flush of their brilliant triumph at Wakefield, would 
advance on the capital. And he was not a man who lacked 
courage in a crisis. Why then did he not strike directly 
for the seat of government which was still in the hands of 
his friends, and where his party was strong, so as to endeavour 
to be in time to assist Warwick ? Instead of doing so he 
tarried on the borders of Wales. From Hereford he moved 
to Gloucester, where he was on February 12. These ten 
days (February 2-12) would have enabled him to cover the 
distance between Gloucester and London with comparative 
ease. Yet he delayed another week, received intimation 
of Warwick's defeat about the 19th February, and three days 
later had only reached the confines of Oxfordshire, meeting 
Warwick on February 22. 

His movements leave an uncanny suspicion that he 
was anxious neither to assist nor even to meet Warwick. 
Warwick's voice had been raised with success against the 
usurpation of the throne by Richard, duke of York ; Edward 
had no reason to hope that he would adopt a different attitude 
towards himself. The only circumstance that would render 
Warwick less dictatorial would be a defeat, and Edward 
astutely let him run the risk. If Warwick were victorious, 
Edward too had a victory in hand — a valuable asset when he 
claimed the throne. Fortune, by giving victory to Edward 
and withholding it from Warwick, made Edward doubly 
independent 1 . 

Mortimer's Cross was sufficient to retrieve the double 
disaster at Wakefield and St Albans, and Edward did 
not fail to appreciate it at its true value. It is significant 

1 Oman (Warwick, 108) loosely states that " the moment that he had 
crushed the Welsh Lancastrians and settled the affairs of the March, 
Edward had set out for London. He had hoped to arrive in time to aid 
Warwick ; he could not achieve the impossible." There is no evidence 
whatever that Edward made any attempt to settle the affairs of the March. 
He did not even go in pursuit. If that had been his aim, Edward could 
have reached London in a week after Mortimer's Cross, the time he actually 
took after hearing the news of the second battle of St Albans. Ten years 
later he covered forty miles a day ; on this occasion he had covered less 
than forty miles in three weeks. 

9—2 



132 MORTIMER'S CROSS [ch. 

of the importance which he attached to it that he 
afterwards assumed as his peculiar war-badge 

Importance * ° 

ofMortimer-s " the rising sun," in allusion to the portent on 
the day of battle 1 . The measure of its impor- 
tance was nothing less than the accession of Edward. He 
could not fail to compare his own success with the failure 
of Warwick ; and it is certain that he afterwards commented 
upon the earl's want of resource at St Albans. From that 
moment Warwick ceased to conjure up terrors for either 
Edward or his associates from the Marches. 

On February 26 the combined armies reached London. 
Edward pro- Margaret had already gone north. On March 1 
claimed king. ^he citizens joined Edward's Welsh army in 
St John's Fields, Clerkenwell, and, under the guidance of 
the Chancellor, George Neville, proclaimed Edward king. 
Two days later the Yorkist leaders met at Baynard's Castle 
and formally offered Edward the crown 2 . There were 
present the Chancellor, Archbishop Bourchier, the bishop 
of Salisbury, the duke of Norfolk, the earl of Warwick, 
Lord Fitz- Walter (Sir John Ratcliffe), Lord Ferrers of 
Chartley (Walter Devereux), and Sir William Herbert. It 
is noticeable that special reference is made to Herbert as 
one of the " chosen and faithful " of Edward 3 . The political 
and military storms of the winter had swept him to the 
highest council in the realm. Edward had already hinted 
broadly at his appreciation of the services of his friends from 
the Marches ; for on meeting with Warwick in Oxfordshire 
he had referred to them as men who had come at their own 
cost 4 . 

Warwick raised no objection to Edward's accession. 

1 Gregory, 211. 

2 Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 77, 155, 173. Chronicle, edit. 
Davies, 108, no. Gregory, 215. 

3 Rymer, XI. 473, " dilectis et fidelibus." The above list of those 
present at the Council is that given by William of Worcester, 775. Rymer 
gives the archbishops, the bishops of Salisbury and Norwich, Grey of 
Ruthin, Viscount Bourchier, William Herbert, John Wenlok, and William 
Falconbridge. 

* Gregory, 215. 



vi] MORTIMER'S CROSS 133 

Edward's father owed much to Warwick ; Edward himself 
little, at any rate before his accession. The earl presumed 
upon his victory at Northampton to resist Richard, duke of 
York, when he claimed the throne. His defeat at St Albans 
gave him no alternative but to concede to the son the 
acquiescence which he had withheld from the father. 

Edward was now king. As such he hurried northwards 
after Margaret. Victorious at a skirmish near Ferrybridge, 
he completely overwhelmed the Lancastrians at Towton 
(March 29, 1461). Edward had won a throne at Mortimer's 
Cross ; Towton made his throne secure. 



CHAPTER VII 

THE WAR IN WALES 

It is unnecessary to enter into a minute description 
The weish °f Edward's campaign in the north of England, 
at Towton. jj e was accompanied by Sir William Herbert ; 
and the Welsh foot-soldiers, the force that had triumphed 
at Mortimer's Cross, reinforced by the levies of Kent, con- 
stituted the nucleus of the army which completed the 
annihilation of the Lancastrians at Towton 1 . It has been 
freely assumed, presumably on the authority of Wavrin, 
not a very faithful chronicler of English affairs, that the 
Lancastrian army comprised a large body of Welshmen who, 
led by Andrew Trollope, displayed magnificent dash in the 
teeth of a blinding snowstorm. Flattering though it be to 
national pride, it lacks corroboration. Indeed, there could 
have been but few Welshmen under the banner of Lancaster 
at that battle. Only a few weeks had passed since Jasper had 
brought the flower of Lancastrian Wales to Mortimer's Cross ; 
and in spite of his steadfast and insistent zeal he could 
not possibly have recovered in so short a space. Even now, 

1 Hearne's Fragment — " The lunges footemen (were assembled) in a 
grete numbre of which the moost parte were Wallshmen and Kentishmen." 
Wavrin, 340. It is generally supposed that David Mathew of I.landaff 
was Edward's standard-bearer at Towton. I find no authority for it. 
In fact, according to Rot. Pari. vi. 93, the king's standard-bearer on that 
occasion was Ralph Vestynden who got an annuity of /io for his services. 
An old political song refers to some important Yorkist personage from 
Wales, as follows : 

The Dolfyn cam from Walys 
Three carpis be his syde. 

Political Songs, Archaeologia, 1842, 346. 



ch. vii] THE WAR IN WALES 135 

when the clash of battle resounded in the north, he was 
quietly engaged in the task of reorganising and encouraging 
his adherents in Wales. If any Welshmen were arrayed 
against Edward at Towton, it seems that they must have 
been raised either by Margaret when she sought refuge in 
Wales after Northampton, or by Exeter and others as they 
passed along the borders of Wales towards Wakefield. 
But there is no peg on which such an assumption can hang. 
After his victory at Towton Edward, leaving to the earl 
of Warwick the task of reducing the Lancastrian 

Grant to ° 

sir wiliiam strongholds of the north, returned to the Welsh 
border, and threw upon Sir William Herbert 
the responsibility of bringing Wales to obedience. With 
this object in view he began to invest him and his brothers 
with considerable power. When at York, on his way to 
the south, he made William Herbert chief justice and 
chamberlain of South Wales, and steward and chief forester 
of Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire 1 . On the following 
day (May 9) a commission was given to him and his two 
brothers Thomas Herbert 2 and John Herbert 3 , and Hugh 
Huntley, " to take into the king's hands the county and 
lordship of Pembroke, with all members in England and 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls (1461-1467), May 8, 1461. Ibid. 7, 30. 

2 This Herbert is also known as Thomas Herbert of Troy. A Thomas 
Herbert the elder was constable of Gloucester in 1461 (June 23). They 
are apparently the same ; for on July 10, 1461, he was given an annuity 
of 50 marks from Gloucester, being designated as Thomas Herbert, esquire 
of the body ; while on July 12, 1462, a grant was made to the king's 
servant, Thomas Herbert the elder, esquire of the body, of certain manors 
in Gloucestershire, and of the lands of Sir William Mulle in Herefordshire, 
lands which Sir William Herbert was empowered to seize. In 1462 and 
1464, he was on a commission of array in Gloucestershire. December 13, 
1461, he was given a messuage (Garlik) in Middlesex. May 27, 1465, he 
received a pardon for the escape of one William Glover from Gloucester. 
In August, 1467, " Thomas Herbert the elder " was made chancellor of 
the earldom of March, receiving the profits of Usk. On February 12, 1470, 
the reversion of the office of constable of Gloucester was given to Richard 
Beauchamp. Thomas Herbert died before June, 1471. On his death 
the lands of William Mulle were given to his son who died without male 
heir. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. 

3 He was a younger brother of Sir William, and was made king's 
attorney in the counties of Carmarthen and Cardigan. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 
August 12, 1461, 69. 



136 THE WAR IN WALES [ch. 

Wales and the Marches of Wales, late of Jasper, earl of 
Pembroke ; the castle of Dunster, county Somerset, and other 
possessions late of James Luttrell, knight ; and the castles 
and lordships of Gooderich and Archenfield in the county 
of Hereford and the Marches of Wales adjacent to the county 
of Gloucester, and all advowsons late of John, earl of Shrews- 
bury, rebels, with power to appoint stewards and all other 
officers." Herbert was also to take possession of the lands 
of Sir William Mulle ; and two days later, May n, authority 
was given to him and Thomas Herbert and John Dwnn 
" to take into the king's hands and demise at farm the 
castles and lordships of Laugharne and Walwyn's Castle, 
late of James, earl of Wiltshire, in South Wales 1 ." Moreover, 
Thomas Herbert became constable of Gloucester, while 
a half-brother William Herbert was made constable of 
Cardigan. 

These offices and honours were conferred on Sir William 

Herbert while the king was at York. Shortly 

raised to afterwards both returned to London, passing 

the peerage. . , _,, _, _ 1 n . 

through Chester on May 28, and making a 
circuit of the Welsh border. A month later Edward was 
crowned with more than usual pomp and splendour. In 
honour of the occasion the most prominent of his friends 
from the Marches were raised to the peerage. Sir William 
Herbert became Lord Herbert of Raglan, Chepstow, and 
Gower ; Sir Walter Devereux was formally recognised as 
Lord Ferrers of Chartley 2 ; Sir William Hastings and 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls (1461-1467) 30, at York. Also ibid, sub dat. This 
John Dwnn was one of the Dwnns of Carmarthenshire, who took part 
at Mortimer's Cross and became prominent later. On March 11, 1461, 
a John Dwnn, usher of the chamber, was made Serjeant of the Armoury 
in the Tower of London. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 9. He was on many com- 
missions with the Herberts, and is not to be confounded with the Dwnns 
of Cheshire. He is sometimes referred to as John Dwnn of Kidwely, but 
it does not appear that he was given official interest there till 1463-4. 
See later. He was constable of Kidwely in 1485. Laugharne is in Car- 
marthenshire, and Walwyn's Castle in Pembrokeshire. 

2 In July 1461, Devereux received a grant of the king's brewhouse 
called " le Walsheman," without Ludgate in the ward of Faryndon. Cal. 
Pat. Rolls, 126. 



vii] THE WAR IN WALES 137 

Sir John Wenlok became Lord Hastings and Lord Wenlok 
respectively. Richard, earl of Warwick, was not made a 
duke as had been confidently anticipated in some quarters. 
This disappointment was the first drop of the torrent which 
engulfed the Nevilles. 

Immediately after the coronation a considerable re- 
distribution of power took place in Wales. Lord Hastings 
was made chamberlain of North Wales 1 ; Richard Grey, 
Lord Powys, became steward of Ceri, Cede wain, and Mont- 
gomery 2 ; John, earl of Worcester, became justice of North 
Wales 3 ; John Dwnn was made constable of Aberystwyth 
and Carmarthen, and sheriff of Carmarthenshire and Car- 
diganshire, "with all profits of pasture of Aberystwyth," 
and the custom called " prysemayse 4 ." 

Preparations now sped onwards for the immediate 
invasion invasion of Wales. On July 8 Lords Herbert 

of waies. an( j p errers were empowered to array all able- 

bodied men in the counties of Hereford, Gloucester, and 
Salop 5 . Early in August they were appointed to inquire 
into all treasons, insurrections, and rebellions in South Wales, 
and to pardon all who submitted, except Jasper Tudor, 
John Skydmore, Thomas Cornwall, and Thomas Fitzhenry 6 . 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, July 31, 1461, 26. 

2 Ibid. July 1, 1461, 17. It thus reversed the decree of a few months 
earlier. 

3 Ibid. November 25, 1461, 62. Hastings, Audley, and William 
Stanley were given possession of Hope and Hopedale in the Marches, and 
of Manorbier and Pennaly in Pembrokeshire. Ibid. 9. July 16. 

4 In the same manner as Sir John Griffith, Edmund Beaufort, duke 
of Somerset, late severally held Aberystwyth. Cal. Pat. Rolls, Sept. 9, 
1461, 40. Among other grants in Wales were the following : Rees 
Vaughan was made provost of Raydirgey ,' Richard Croft the younger, 
receiver of the possessions of John, earl of Shrewsbury ; Roger Eyton, 
constable of Shrewsbury ; Thomas Sandeland, cannoneer and master- 
plumber in the royal castles of North Wales ; John Moyle of Denbigh, 
an annuity of ten marks for his good services to the king's father ; and also 
letters of denizenship. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. 

5 Ibid, sub ann. 36. 

6 With the two lords on this commission were Lord Herbert's brother, 
Thomas Herbert ; a half-brother named William Herbert, and John Dwnn. 
This William Herbert was made constable of Cardigan on August 2, 1461. 
On August 27, 1464, the king's servitor, William Herbert, esquire, one of 
the clerks of the signet, was appointed escheator within the county of 



138 THE WAR IN WALES [ch. 

On August 12 Roger Kynaston and a number of others were 
commissioned to urge the king's subjects of Shropshire to 
array a force at their own expense for the defence of the 
county and the adjoining parts of Wales. On that day, 
also, separate commissions were issued to Thomas, John, 
and Richard Herbert, to act against Jasper Tudor. The 
general muster was to be at Hereford 1 . 

Parliament was not to meet till November, and Edward 
decided to spend a considerable portion of the interval in 
the Marches so as to keep in close touch with the progress 
of events in Wales ; and his movements appear to have 
attracted considerable attention 2 . He had reached the 
borders before the end of August. On September 4 he was 
at Bristol, where he was " most royallv received." Four 
days later he left for Gloucester, whence he moved to Ross, 
Hereford, and Ludlow. He remained at Ludlow for nearly 
a week, till September 26 s . Meanwhile Herbert and Ferrers 
had gone into Wales to extinguish the few flickering Lancas- 
trian lights, with every prospect of success. " As for any 
grete doing in Wales I trust God we shal not doubte. The 
Lord Herbert and the Lord Ferrers of Chartley with divers 
many other gentilmen ben gone afore to dense the countreye 
afore us 4 ." 

Carnarvon. In January, 1462, he was given Kilpek castle, eight miles 
from Hereford, the confiscated property of the earl of Ormond. The 
reversion of his lands was bestowed upon Lord Herbert, should he die 
without male heir. A William Herbert was comptroller of Bristol in 1466. 
On July 20, 14 61, the half-brother and Lord Hastings were empowered 
to seize certain lands in Northamptonshire. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. 

1 Kynaston was sheriff of Merionethshire. In the meantime Lord 
Herbert's influence increased rapidly. On September 7, 1461, he received 
the custody of the Welsh estates of the duke of Buckingham during the 
minority of Henry, the heir. It included the lordship of Brecknock, 
Newport, and certain other parts of Gwent. By another grant he became 
steward of the royal lordships of Clifford, Glasbury, and Wynfurton in 
the Marches. His brothers, Thomas and Richard, and Lord Ferrers, were 
associated with him. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 13, 43, 98. 

2 Paston Letters, 11. 38, 41 ; August 23, 1461. 

3 Ellis, Letters, First Series, 1. 15-16. " And there he will abide till 
Parliament time." He was at Gloucester on the n Sept. Privy Seals. 
Stow, Annates, 416. 

* Ellis, Letters; op. cit. 15-16. Written at Bristol, Sept. 9, 1461. 



vii] THE WAR IN WALES 139 

After the reverse at Mortimer's Cross, Jasper Tudor had 
retired to his estates in Pembrokeshire. On 

Jasper s 

movements February 25, three weeks after that battle, 
Mortimer's he wrote to his stewards at Denbigh, Roger 
Puleston 1 and John Eyton, exhorting them to 
be faithful. The letter was written from Tenby ; and it 
shows, what we have already pointed out, that the Herberts 
and their connections were regarded as the chief engineers 
of that campaign on the Yorkist side. 

" To the right trusty and well-beloved Roger a Puleston 
and to John Eyton, and to either of them. We suppose 
that ye have well in remembrance the great dishonour and 
rebuke that we and ye now late have by traitors March, 
Herbert, and Dwnns with their affinities, as well in letting 
us of our journey to the kinge, as in putting my father your 
kinsman to the death, and their trayterously demeaning we 
purpose with the might of our Lord and assistance of you 
and other our kinsmen and friends within short time to 
avenge. Trusting verily that you will be well willed and 
put your hands into the same, and of your disposicon, and 
with your good advice therein we pray you to ascertayne 
us in all hast possible as our especiall trust is in you. Written 
at our town of Tenby the xxv February 2 ." 

On a previous occasion the Yorkists had held Denbigh 
with grim tenacity against Jasper. It was now as stubborn 
on his behalf. The castle was still holding out in July as 
appears from the letter which follows. 

1 The families of Tudor and Puleston were connected. 

Mallt m. Tudor ap Grono m. Margaret, dau. of Thomas ap 

Llywelyn ap Owen 
Gwervil m. Griffith Hanmer •-. , 

I I 

Angharad m. John Puleston Meredith ap Tudor m. Margaret 

dau. of David Vaughan 
I 
Roger Puleston Owen Tudor 

In 1456 the earl of Richmond gave Roger Puleston an annuity of 
10 marks for his services. Arch. Camb. i. i. 146-7. Dated September 10. 

2 Ancient and Modern Denbigh, 86 ; where the original letter is given as 
above. It is dated now for the first time. 



140 THE WAR IN WALES [ch. 

' To Roger Puleston, Keeper of the castle of Denbigh. 
We have received your letters by Hugh and understand the 
matter comprised therein ; and as touching the keeping of the 
castle of Denbigh we pray you that you will do your faithful 
diligence for the safeguard of it, taking the revenue of the 
lordship there for the vittaling of the same, b}' the hands of 
Griffith Vaughan, receyvour there, — we have written unto him 
that he should make p'veyance therefore ; and that ye will 
understand the goodwill and dispossicon of the people and 
that country towards my Lorde Prince, and to send us word 
as soone as you may. Written at my town of Tenbye, 
the xxiii July 1 ." 

Edward, with commendable clemency, had already made 
overtures of peace to the Pulestons and Griffith Vaughan ; 
for early in July he had enrolled them on a commission in 
Chirkland with a number of other staunch royalists of North 
Wales. But his conciliatory efforts were for the present 
unavailing 2 . 

Lords Herbert and Ferrers had already entered upon 
their task of reducing Wales on September g, 1461. They 
had two important strongholds to deal with besides Denbigh ; 
for Harlech was held by David ap Eynon and some English 
Lancastrian refugees, notably Tunstal, while Pembroke 
castle was held for Jasper by Sir John Skydmore. 

Herbert attacked Pembroke first. It was the most 
Herbert formidable, and consequently the greatest 

attacks prize. The fleet was sent to co-operate so that 

Pembroke. r r 

no assistance might reach the castle from beyond 
the sea 3 . Philip Castle of Pembroke and Thomas Mansel 

1 Anc. and Mod. Denbigh, 87. Hitherto it has been found impossible 
to give the correct date to this letter. 

2 The commission was to receive attornments from the tenants of Chirk. 
Others on the commission were John, abbot of Llaneguyfall ; David Kyffin, 
doctor of Laws ; John Hanmer ; John Trevor ; John Puleston, and Robert 
ap Howel. John Hanmer and Griffith Vaughan afterwards assisted in 
defending Harlech. Cal. Pat. Rolls (1461-1467), 37. 

3 Th'erll of March (i.e. Edward IV, the Lancastrian writer of the letter 
not recognising him as king) is into Wales by land and hath sent his navy 
thider by sea. Paston Letters, 11. 46. August 30, 1461. The ship for which 



vii] THE WAR IN WALES 141 

were empowered to man some ships for the purpose. The 
Yorkist leaders would find no opposition on their march 
westwards ; Oystermouth castle, near Swansea, one of the 
gates of Gower, had been placed in the hands of a local Yorkist, 
Sir Hugh ap John 1 . Like so many others of the Welshmen 
engaged in these wars he had fought in France, and had been 
one of the council of Robert Norreys. He was now constable 
of the castle, and reeve of the lordship of Gower. He it 
was on behalf of whom the earl of Warwick used his influence 
with Elizabeth Woodville, afterwards the queen of Edward 
IV, to get her to accept him in marriage 2 . 

Tenby apparently offered no resistance, although much 
Pembroke care na d been bestowed upon its fortifications 

submits. ky jasper. Pembroke, too, was " victualled, 

manned, and apparelled for a long time after 3 ." These 
preparations notwithstanding, Skydmore, when summoned 
by Herbert to surrender the castle into his hands, obsequi- 
ously delivered it " without any war or resistance 4 ." This 
took place on September 30. Skydmore's conduct was in 
complete harmony with the general practice during the wars. 
Impregnable as were many of the castles of England at this 
period, their history is an uninspiring recital of slavish 
deference to the will of the conqueror of the moment. 

The betrayal was inspired by a natural desire for personal 
safety and the security of his estates, though it availed him 
nothing for the moment. He received a written pledge 
from Herbert and Ferrers that his life would be spared 
and that his lands would not be confiscated. Both promised 

Castle and Thomas Mansel were called upon to provide mariners was the 
Trinity of Minehead. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 99 ; September 5. 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls (1461-1467), 81. April 1, and November 25, 1461. 
He was granted a yearly grant of 20 marks. See also Glamorgan Charters, V. 
1664. Proceedings of the Privy Council, 1453, 138. Another of the family, 
apparently, was David ap John of Swansea. See a revocation of a protec- 
tion lately granted to him to stay in the king's service because he delayed 
in the city and suburbs of London instead of victualling Calais. Cal. Pat. 
Rolls, February 7, 1464. 

2 Archaeologia, 1842 ; 132-3. 

3 Rot. Pari. 483. 
* Ibid. 



142 THE WAR IN WALES [ch. 

to intercede with the king on his behalf. But in spite of 
this guarantee, when parliament met, a bill of attainder 
was brought against him. It failed to pass. Nevertheless, 
at the latter end of the parliament, his estates were forfeited 
by royal ordinance 1 . 

The lords promised that " he should have better than his 
sir john livelihood, and he was then admitted unto the 

skydmore. kyngs good grace as he hath redy to showe in 

writyng under the seale of the said Lord Herbert." Herbert 
was present in the parliament in which the attainder was 
moved and rejected. But " after many lords and knights 
had departed, by mervelous pry vat labour," a bill signed 
by the king was brought to the Commons containing an 
ordinance that Sir John Skydmore should forfeit his livelihood 
saving his life and goods. At the time he was at home 
in the country " trusting to the promise of Lords Herbert 
and Ferrers." 

Jasper probably superintended the affairs of his party 
in North W'ales in person. He was assisted by the duke 
of Exeter 2 , and Thomas Fitzhenry of Hereford, who had 
fought with the Lancastrians at Mortimer's Cross. On 
October 4 it was reported that all resistance was at an 
end, and that Jasper had taken refuge in the mountains 
of Snowdon, the last stronghold of so many lost causes, 
and the nursery of as many new enterprises. " And all 
the castles and holds in South Wales and in North Wales 
are given and yielded up to the king. And the duke of 
Exeter and the earl of Pembroke (Jasper) are floon and 
taken the mounteyns and divers lords with great puissance 
are after them ; and the most part of gentlemen and men 

1 Rot. Pari. 483 contains his Act of Attainder. Also ibid. (1472-1503) 
29, which contains his petition. A schedule annexed to the petition 
notifies that William Herbert by the authority given to him by letters 
of Privy Seal, dated May 13, 1461, received Skydmore into the king's 
grace on September 30, 1461, at Pembroke. The attainder was reversed 
in 1472 (October 6). Rot. Pari. See an exemplification of it ; ibid. 
July i, 1474. 

2 He was Henry Holland who married Anne, sister of Edward, but 
who remained a Lancastrian and was attainted this year. 



vii] THE WAR IN WALES 143 

of worship are comen to the king and have grace, of all 
Wales 1 ." 

The writer was premature. Denbigh seems to have 
yielded without further pressure. It must have suffered 
considerable damage during these years. As we have 
seen, in the previous year a substantial grant was made 
to repair the disastrous effects of the Lancastrian siege. 
Early in 1462 Edward IV advanced a sum to enable the 
burgesses to rebuild their houses " brent by certain rebells 
and traytors 2 ." 

But Harlech had not yet submitted, and was to remain 
Battle of inexorable for seven years more. Jasper Tudor 

Tuthiii. anc | j-he North Wales Lancastrians were brought 

to bay near Carnarvon. They made a last stand at Tuthill, 
just outside the walls of that town, on October 16, 1461 3 . 
As the duke of Exeter had fought at Towton it is probable 
that he had brought reinforcements to Jasper by sea. 
The Yorkists once more triumphed, though Jasper again 
displayed his wonted subtle resourcefulness in eluding 
pursuit. He escaped to Ireland, where he stirred up strife 
during the winter 4 . It is curious that the engagement 
at Tuthill has escaped the notice of every historian of the 
Wars of the Roses. 

The Yorkists did not pursue their advantage by compell- 
ing Harlech, the only remaining Lancastrian stronghold 
in Wales, to surrender 5 . It may be that, the day for the 
opening of parliament having been fixed for November 4, 
they were more desirous to appear there than to traverse 
the bleak and pathless regions of Snowdonia on the approach 

1 Paston Letters, n. 52 ; October 4, 1461. 

* The original document is given in Records of Denbigh ; dated February 
23, 1462. 

3 Rot. Pari. 1461, 477-8. In 1455 there were 20 soldiers at Carnarvon, 
including men-at-arms and archers. In May 1460, there were 18, including 
five soldiers of the town, who were distinct from the castle garrison and 
had their own captain. Mediaeval Boroughs, Lewis. 

4 Paston Letters, 11. 118. 

5 Harlech had a garrison of 12 soldiers in 1442. Edward Hampden, 
governor in 1444, increased the number to 24. 



144 THE WAR IN WALES [ch. 

of winter. Edward's supine indifference to the existence 
of this remote garrison kept North Wales in a state of war 
for several years after the rest of the country had been 
brought into subjection. An echo of the prevailing anarchy 
was heard in his first parliament in the form of a petition 
from the " Tenants and Commons of North Wales," as 
follows : 

" Where many and divers of them been daily taken 
The Hariech prisoners and put to fine and ransom as it 
garrison. were in land of war ; and many and divers 

of them daily robbed and spoiled of their goods and cattle 
contrary to the law by David ap Ieuan ap Eynon, Griffith 
Vaughan ap Griffith ap Eynon, Jenkyn ap Iorwerth ap 
Eynon, Thomas ap Ieuan ap Eynon, Griffith ap Ieuan 
ap Eynon, John ap Ieuan ap Eynon, John Hanmer, Morys 
ap David ap Griffith, David ap Ieuan ap Owen, David ap 
Einon ap Ieuan, Grommys ap Ieuan ap Eynon ap Ieuan, 
Grommys ap Howel ap Morgan, Edward ap Morgan, John 
Tother, clerk, Griffith ap Ieuan ap Iorwerth, and Rheinallt 
ap Griffith ap Bleddyn, and Morys Robert ; and over more 
the said David ap Eynon calleth himself by the name of 
Constable of Harlech, and that kepeth to the use and behove 
of him that he calleth his sovereign lord King Henry VI, 
saying as well by his mouth as by his writing that the said 
castle was committed to him by his sovereign lord aforesaid 
and by his sovereign lady Queen Margaret and his right 
and gracious lord Prince Edward, and sworn to keep it 
to their use and will not deliver it to no other person saving 
to such as one of them will assign, notwithstanding the 
King's commandment is the contrary. And daily the said 
David and all the aforesaid other misdoers take and repute 
m all their demeanour the said late king for their sovereign 
lord and not the king our sovereign lord that now is as 
their duty is. And moreover all the said misdoers taketh 
oxen, sheep, wheat, and victuals of the said poor tenants 
for stuff of the said castle with strong hand and will not 



VII] 



THE WAR IN WALES 



145 



deliver it to no such person as the late King hath deputed 
to be his constable there." 

Then follows a specious proclamation that David must 
surrender the castle before the Feast of Purification ; and 
that if he came to Carnarvon in peaceable wise, and there 
before the king's justice or chamberlain found sufficient 
security for his future good conduct, he would be pardoned ; 
otherwise he would be attainted of treason and his lands 
and title forfeited. This proclamation was to be made 
in the counties of Carnarvon and Merioneth 1 . 

The garrison defied the proclamation, and during the 
next few years Harlech remained a safe refuge 
for the Lancastrians, and a convenient link 
with Ireland and Scotland. Contemporary Welsh poets 
are unanimous as to the assistance rendered by it to the 
cause. That it inspired the Lancastrians to renewed efforts 
became evident very soon. For a new scheme issued 
from their busy forge, according to which Jasper and the 
duke of Exeter were to land at Beaumaris, " by the appoint- 
ment of Robert Gold, captain of the duke of Burgundy 2 " ; 
while simultaneous attacks were to be made from the north 
and the south-east of England. Edward acted with decision. 
The scheme was destroyed before it matured. In February 



Lancastrian 
schemes. 



1 Rot. Pari. 1 Edward IV. 



Einon ap Griffith (temp. Richard II) 



David 

ap 

Einon 

(Eynon) 



Ievan ap Einon 

H 

Rees ap 
Ievan 



1 
daughter 



Meredith 

ap 

Ievan 



daughter m. 

Ievan 

ap 

Meredith 

^ 

Howel 
Vychan 



Meurig Vychan 

David ap 
Meurig 
Vychan 



John ap Meredith 

1 i ' 1 1 1 

Morris Ievan Robert Owen Griffith 

Wynne, Gwydir Family, 28. 

2 Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 158, 175. Also Paston Letters, 11. 
45. 9 1 . 93 ; February, 1462. 

E. W. R. IO 



146 THE WAR IN WALES [ch. 

1462, the earl of Oxford and a few others were executed 
as accomplices. On March 1, Lord Herbert and Lord 
Ferrers were commanded to array all able-bodied men 
in South Wales and the Marches, the former and his brother 
Thomas Herbert being also commissioned to equip a fleet 
from Bristol and neighbouring ports to clear the coast 
of Wales of Lancastrian ships 1 . It is not certain whether 
Jasper actually landed in Wales. During the early part 
of the year, as we have seen, he was in Ireland causing 
trouble. " These three weeks came there neither ship 
nor boat out of Ireland to bring no tidings, and so it seemeth 
jasper in there is much to doo there by the earl of 

Ireland. Pembroke 2 ." Leaving him there for the pre- 

sent, we shall consider what rewards were bestowed upon 
the Yorkists of Wales for their valuable services to Edward. 

A wide re-distribution of lands, and consequently of 
political power, now took place in Wales. The lavish 
profusion with which Edward enriched the Herbert family 
is a lucid commentary upon the value which he attached 
to their services. It was also an augury, clear and palpable, 
of Edward's intention to raise up a new aristocracy whose 
secret counsels were to aid him to outwit the old. 

The lands of Jasper, earl of Pembroke, the earl of Wilt- 
Welsh shire, and Sir John Skydmore had already 

Yorkists' been confiscated. Lord Herbert received those 

of Jasper and the earl of Wiltshire in South 
Wales. They included Pembroke, Tenby, Emlyn, Cilgerran, 
Llanstephan, and Walwyn's Castle 3 . A few days later, on 
February 12, he was given the custody and marriage of 

1 Commission to William Herbert, knight, and Thomas Herbert, to 
take vessels and ships within the port of Bristol and other ports of the west 
towards Wales and ports in Wales to resist the king's enemies. Cal. Pat. 
Rolls, March 1, 1462; 100, 132. A fortnight later, Thomas Herbert was 
given the custody of Bekford, Gloucester. Ibid. 181. 

2 Paston Letters, II. 118. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 114; February 3, 1462. In South-west Wales 
Herbert was invested with the manors of Magor and Redwyk, the town 
and lordship of Caldecot, the castle and manor of Archenfield, late of James, 
earl of Wiltshire. Walwyn's Castle was also forfeited by Wiltshire. 



vii] THE WAR IN WALES 147 

Jasper's nephew, Henry, earl of Richmond, then a child 
of four, " for a thousand pounds in hand paid." It was 
Herbert's intention, as we shall see, to marry him to his 
daughter Maud. 

A few days later he received the custody of the lordships 
Lord of Swansea, Gower, and Kilvey, during the 

Herbert. minority of John, son and heir of the duke 

of Norfolk, rendering the king two hundred marks a year ; 
also the town and castle of Haverfordwest for twenty 
years, rendering the king one hundred marks a year 1 . 
In April he appeared in the House of Lords, and was made 
a knight of the Garter. 

Richard Herbert received the confiscated lands of 
Richard Jasper's faithful adherent Fitzhenry, as well 

Herbert. as those of Sir John Skydmore, in Hereford- 

shire, including the lordship of Moccas 2 . 

Roger Vaughan of Tretower, in Brecknock, received 
Roger extensive lands in Somerset, Devon, and Dorset 3 , 

vaughan. His son Thomas ap Roger Vaughan became 

receiver of the lordships of Brecknock, Hay, and Huntingdon, 
during the minority of the heir to the dukedom of Bucking- 
ham 4 . John Dwnn received Laugharne, the confiscated 
property of the earl of Wiltshire, as well as some lands 
in Northamptonshire, " for good service to Richard, duke 
of York, and against Henry VI and Jasper 5 ." 

The lands of Thomas Cornwall, in Devon, were shared 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, February 12, 1462; 114, 119. On August 26, 1462, 
Herbert was granted the custody of the lands of one Nicolas Iwardby, 
during the minority of the heir. Ibid. 211. 

John Mowbray, third duke of Norfolk, died November 6, 1461. He 
was succeeded by his son John (born October, 1444), the fourth duke of 
Norfolk, baron of Gower, Bromfield, Chirk, and Yale, on November 6, 
1461. He died January 17, 1476, leaving an only child, Lady Anne 
Mowbray, who was betrothed to Richard, second son of Edward IV. On 
her death the dukedom escheated to the Crown. Doyle's Baronage. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, February 20, 1462 ; 77. 

3 Ibid. July 11, 1462; 192. 

* Ibid. August 12, 1461 ; 43. 5 Ibid. February 24, 1462; 111. 

On February 10, the office of master of the king's armoury in the 
Tower was confirmed to him. One of the name was also comptroller of 
customs at Bristol. Ibid. 143, 188. 



148 THE WAR IN WALES [ch. 

between John ap Jankyn and Trahaiarn ap Ievan ap Meurig 1 , 
while one David Gough received Stapleton in the Marches 2 . 
Thomas and Richard Croft received lands in Oxfordshire ; 
John Milewater found his reward in the receivership of 
confiscated castles in Wales ; Lord Ferrers received Richard's 
Castle in Herefordshire 3 . Amongst other grants one of 
the most interesting was that of " letters of denization 
as Englishman for the king's servitor David Middleton 
one of the yeomen of the Crown, born a Welshman," to 
him and his heirs 4 . The Middletons of Denbighshire wrote 
their names large in the annals of the seventeenth century 
as scholars, engineers, and sailors. 

Another recipient of grants was Sir Thomas Vaughan 
sir Thomas wno piloted his craft with much skill through 
vaughan many storms. His parentage is uncertain, 

though it seems to be generally agreed that he was a son 
of Sir Roger Vaughan. By some means he came under 
the protection of the duke of Somerset and Adam Moleyns, 
through whose influence the Privy Council relieved him 
of his disabilities as a Welshman. In 1450 he was master 
of ordnance and was commissioned to equip Carisbrook 
castle, Isle of Wight, against the attacks of the French. 
In 1458 we find him as treasurer of the king's household. 
Like his kinsman William Herbert he was associated with 
Jasper Tudor for a time ; but he soon took the badge 
of York, and was attainted at the Coventry Parliament. 
Edward gave him lands in Surrey, and in 1463 he was sent 
on an embassy to the duke of Burgundy 5 . 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, January 20, 1462 ; 76. Trahaiarn was on a com- 
mission with the Herberts in June 1463. 

2 January 23, 1462. Ibid. 114, 428. In March 1465, he is stated to be 
possessed of Stapleton, lately the lands of Thomas Cornwall. 

3 Ibid. 91, 153. 

4 Ibid. September 6, 1462; 198. One Thomas Banon received Llan- 
llwch, Carmarthenshire. Ibid. 112. 

6 Dwnn's Visitations, I. 42, 106. Jones, Breconshire, in. 507. Pro- 
ceedings of the Privy Council, v. 256. Stephenson, in. 475. In 1453 he 
received certain grants in Middlesex, being associated with Jasper Tudor ; 
also 50 marks a year. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. Act of Resumption, 
1455. His career is not easy to follow; for he appears sometimes as 



vii] THE WAR IN WALES 149 

To return to the main stream of events. Though 
Jasper Tudor had been driven out of Wales, Edward con- 
tinued to keep a strict watch on the borders. On November 
1, 1462, John Paston, junior, who was staying at Holt 
castle in Denbighshire, wrote to his father saying that 
the duke of Norfolk was likely to keep his Christmas in 
Wales, " for the king hath desired him to do the same 1 ." 
Soon, however, Edward summoned him to the north where 
the scattered Lancastrian parties were once more con- 
centrating. The king was at Durham on December n. 
With him were Herbert, Ferrers, and others of the " Kyngys 
house 2 ." This description of the two lords is strikingly 
suggestive of what they had so far achieved, a position 
pregnant with superlative possibilities. 

We left Jasper stirring up strife in Ireland. We next 
. ._ hear of him in Scotland assisting Somerset, 

Herbert and ° ' 

jasper in the at the head of three hundred men, to defend 
' I4 3 ' Bamborough castle, which was being besieged 
by the earls of Worcester and Arundel 3 . The castle sur- 
rendered on Christmas eve 1462, whereupon Jasper, unable 
to obtain the clemency proffered to Somerset and others, 
retired to Scotland under safe conduct, " unarmed, with 

Thomas Vaughan of Brecknock, and at other times as Thomas Vaughan 
of London. For the embassy see Rymer, XI. 504-7; and Wavrin, 412. 
The lands in Surrey were formerly the property of his wife's former husband 
Thomas Brown, who was attainted. Rot. Pari. v. 534. In 1462 he 
received the lordship of Penkelly in Brecknock. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. 
He was keeper of the Great Wardrobe in September, 1460. On November 
9, 1464, there is noted a "Pardon to Thomas Vaughan, esquire, keeper 
of the Great Wardrobe of Henry VI, one of the mainpernors of Jasper, 
for the custody of Cantrecelly and Penkelly." He and William Hastings 
were coupled in a grant of the presentation to the next vacant prebend 
in the college of St George's, Windsor. 

On March 29, 1465, certain lands in Cardiganshire were granted to 
Thomas Vaughan "one of the yeomen of the king's Chamber" for his 
services to the king and his father. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 438. This apparently 
was he of the name who was killed at Edgecote. 

1 Paston Letters, 11. 119. But Norfolk did not stay in Wales, for he 
was at Newcastle on December 11, 1462. Ibid. 1 21-123. He was at 
Holt again in March, 1464. 

2 Paston Letters, op. cit. 'Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 157. 
Lewis Glyn Cothi, 1. xviii. 

3 William of Worcester, 780. Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles, 158. 



150 THE WAR IN WALES [ch. 

white staves in their hands 1 ." Subsequently he assisted 
in the operations which culminated in the taking of Alnwick 
in May, 1463. 

Lord Herbert's exploits in the north are duly recorded 
by contemporary Welsh poets. Lewis Glyn Cothi nowhere 
gives a more glowing picture than that in which, with 
pardonable poetic licence, he describes his hero urging 
forward his men, " his frame ablaze on prancing steed, 
and his eyes glistening like glowing embers 2 ." 

In the summer of 1463 Herbert's attention was once 
„ . _, more directed to Wales, where the ashes of 

Herbert s 

power in war were still smouldering. In Tune he was 

Wales. 

made constable of Harlech and chamberlain and 
chief justice of Merionethshire, with all powers pertaining to 
the office of chief justice of North Wales, so as to be able 
to deal more effectively with the recalcitrant garrison 
there 3 . During Herbert's lifetime the country was to be 
separated from the jurisdiction of the justice of North 
Wales. Vindictiveness was certainly not a feature of 
Edward IV's treatment of his Welsh Lancastrian foes. 
If any of them even now were disposed to give in their 
allegiance Lord Herbert, Lord Ferrers, Richard Herbert, 
and Trahaiarn ap Ievan ap Meurig were empowered to 
grant them a full pardon 4 . 

1 William of Worcester, Annates, 780. Margaret had already sailed 
for Brittany, "going between Wales and Ireland with four ships." 

2 A'i wyneb yn dan ar farch anwar, 
A'i olwg mawrwych val dig marwar, 

A'i fon, a'i ddwyfron, a'i ddar, a'i saled, 
A'i wayw yn lluched neu yn dan llachar. 

Lewis Glyn Cothi, 1. xviii. 
s At the same time he became steward of Carmarthenshire and Car- 
diganshire, Usk, Dinas, Caerleon, Builth, Ewyas and Clifford, grants 
which had been previously conferred upon him by Margaret. Cal. Pat. 
Rolls, June 17, 1463; 271. 

4 Ibid. June 23, 1463; 280. This Trahaiarn, whom we have met with 
before, is addressed by Guto'r Glyn as one of the loyal supporters of 
Herbert, "his lance and his shield." Iolo MSS. 705. 

It is worthy of notice that some of the powers conferred upon Herbert 
encroached upon the jurisdiction of Lord Hastings, chamberlain of North 
Wales. 



vii] THE WAR IN WALES 151 

But in spite of Herbert's vigilance and Edward's clemency, 
„ L Tasper's enthusiasm, his hardihood, and his 

Further or 

trouble in towering gift of patience, had not yet failed 

Wales, 1464. . • 1 • r 11 • 1 -ii • 

to inspire his followers to indomitable resistance. 
During the winter of 1463-4 material was laid for another 
conflagration. The duke of Somerset who, since his pardon 
by Edward at the end of 1462, had been kept in semi- 
confinement, became privy to a scheme which involved 
simultaneous risings in Wales and in the north of England. 
He was to engineer the rebellion in the northern counties 
of England ; while Roger Puleston and John Hanmer 
were entrusted with the leadership in North Wales. In 
South Wales Jasper relied upon Philip Mansel of Gower, 
Hopkyn ap Rhys of Llangyfelach near Swansea, and Lewis 
ap Rhydderch ap Rhys of Strata Florida 1 . They were 
probably assisted by Philip Castle of Pembroke who was 
attainted soon afterwards " because, in spite of previous 
pardons, he assisted Jasper 2 ." It will be recollected that 
he and Thomas Mansel had been commissioned to equip 
some ships during the siege and reduction of Pembroke. 

The rising in Wales was apparently premature. John 
Battle of Dwnn, who was now sheriff of the two West 

Drysiwyn. Wales counties, and captain of Carmarthen and 

Aberystwyth, with the help of Roger Vaughan, overwhelmed 
the insurgents at Drysiwyn in the valley of the Towy, 
between Carmarthen and Llandilo, before they could become 
dangerous. These Yorkists were subsequently rewarded 
with the confiscated estates of the luckless Lancastrians 3 . 



1 This Lewis we presume to be the Lewis ap Rhys of Strata Florida, 
designated "armiger of Carmarthenshire," who was reported to have been 
executed with Owen Tudor after the battle of Mortimer's Cross. 

2 Rot. Pari. (1464-5), 511-512. 

3 Rot. Pari. (1464-5), 5 1 1-5 12. In the records the name is given as 
"Dryffryn," and is stated to be in Carmarthenshire. The spot alluded 
to is no doubt that mentioned in the text. Drysiwyn was a royal castle. 
Its constable in 1439 was Thomas Staunton, who was also master-forester 
of Glyn Cothi. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 245. 

Lord Ferrers was constable of Aberystwyth in 1463. Record Reports, 
1887, 423. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 270, 336. 



1 52 THE WAR IN WALES [ch. 

It was this engagement at Dryslwyn, probably, that 
PhilIip brought Edward once more to the borders 

Mansei. f \y a les. He was at Gloucester on February 9, 

and " punished his rebellious against the law 1 ." Philip 
Mansei and Hopkyn ap Rhys were attainted and their 
estates forfeited 2 . Roger Vaughan entered into possession of 
the former's lands, namely, Oxwich, Scurla Castle, Nicholston, 
Reynoldston, Manselton, parts of Llanrhidian, and certain 
rents from Kidwely ; and also of Llangyfelach and Kilvey, 
near Swansea, the property of Hopkyn ap Rhys 3 . John 
John Dwnn received two parcels of the duchy 

Dwnn. Q f Lancaster in the lordship of Kidwely. 

Henry Dwnn received an annuity of £20 from the issues 
of Kidwely, Carnwallon, Iscennin, which were also parcel 
of that duchy in West Wales 4 . 

We have no details to show how widely the infection of 
disloyalty spread in North Wales. Even the measures 
taken to combat it are swathed in a mantle of obscurity. 
Whatever was done fell to the lot of the duke of Norfolk, 
as appears from the following letter, which was written 
on March 1, from the duke's headquarters at Holt castle : 

" My lord (the duke of Norfolk) hath great labour and 
North cost here in Walys for to take divers gentlemen 

Wales. which were consenting and helping on to the 

duke of Somerset's going, and they were appealed of other 
certain points of treason, and this matter. And because 
the king sent my lord word to keep this country, is 
the reason why my lord tarryeth here thus long. And 
now the king hath given power to my lord whether he will 

1 Privy Seals. Paston Letters, II. 144-5; and supplement to Intro- 
duction, 82. 

2 Rot. Pari. 5 1 1-2. The attainder was reversed by Henry VII. Ibid. 
1483, 278-9. Their confederate Lewis ap Rhydderch is not mentioned 
there. For details of the local history of the Mansels, see Glamorgan 
Charters, passim. 

* Cal. Pat. Rolls, March 23, 1465 ; 426. A Philip ap Rhys was 
Governor of Strata Florida in 1443, with Lord Audley and Meredith ap 
Owen. Glam. Charters, v, 1590. 

4 Rot. Pari. v. 534. Also Cal. Pat. Rolls, March 11, 1465. 



vii] THE WAR IN WALES 153 

do execution on these gentlemen or pardon them, as he 
pleases, and as far as I can understand yet they shall have 
grace. And as soon as these men come in my lord proposes 
to go to London which will be probably in a fortnight. 
The men's names that be impeached are these, — John 
Hanmer, William his son, Roger Puleston, and Edward 
ap Madoc. These be men of worship that shall come in." 
The writer was John Paston, the younger 1 . 

Somerset's hazardous undertaking in the north of 
England also met with disaster. He had drawn a large 
contingent from North Wales with the assistance, as we 
have seen, of those patient and energetic kinsmen of Jasper 
Tudor, Roger Puleston and John Hanmer. " He stole 
out of Wales with a prevy many toward Newcastle 2 ." 
At Durham he was detected and barely escaped being 
arrested in bed. " He escaped away in hys schyrt and 
barefote, and ii of hys men were take 3 ." He then took 
a leading part in the campaigns of Hedgeley Moor (April), 
and Hexham (May). After the latter engagement he 
was captured by the servants of John Middleton 4 , and 
executed. The temporalities of the sees of St Asaph and 
Bangor were forfeited on account of the bishops' participation 
in these Lancastrian movements 5 . 

Herbert was once more empowered to pacify the Lan- 
castrians of Wales. In October, 1464, he obtained a com- 
mission to receive into the king's allegiance all rebels, 
with few exceptions, within Harlech castle and Merioneth- 
shire 6 . 

Jasper as usual kept in the background during these 
commotions. He was a consummate engineer of rebellion, 

1 Paston Letters, IX. 15 1-2. 

2 Gregory, 223. Rot. Pari. 511-512, which gives his attainder. 

3 Gregory, op. cit. 

4 William of Worcester, Annales. Brief Latin Chronicle, 178. 

5 Rymer, 1464-5 ; 534, 539. A list of the chief men in the north after 
Hexham does not contain the names of either Jasper or Herbert. Ellis, 
Letters, Second Series, 1. 131. 

6 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 355. 



154 THE WAR IN WALES [ch 

who considered his own person too valuable an asset to 
jasper Tudor's his cause to allow himself to fall into the 
adventures. clutches of his enemy. Fortunately for him he 
had many friends in the Principality, while Harlech was 
still a haven of refuge. His comrades, though dwindling 
in numbers, were sufficiently loyal to ensure his safety. 
If we are to credit contemporary poetry, his bard Tudur 
Penllyn, and his intimate friend Griffith Vaughan of Corsy- 
gedol, North Wales, could have revealed his places of hiding. 
They knew where he slept the night before his departure, 
and from what spot on Barmouth shore he sailed away to 
bide his time, and await the morrow of better hope 1 . ' He 
moved," says Hall, " from country to country in Wales, 
not always at his heart's ease, nor in security of life or 
surety of living. Such an unstable and blind goods is 
fortune 2 ." 

Ellis Griffith, the Welsh Tudor chronicler, gives more 
specific details, if we can trust them : " In that time (after 
the pacification of the north) Jasper, according to what 
I heard from my elders, took the ship which belonged to 
a gentleman who lived at Mostyn, in the parish of Chwitford 
in Flintshire, at a place called Pwll Picton. The earl 
(Jasper) was constrained to carry a load of pease -straw on 
his back as he went to the ship lest he should be recognised 
because there were not wanting those who searched for 
him, and he betook himself to Brittany more by his own 
naval skill than by the skill of the sailors of Picton 3 ." 

Lord Herbert was now further enriched with a grant 

1 Cardiff MSS. Tudur Penllyn. 

2 Hall, 261. 

3 "Yn yr amser y ffoes Jasbar. . . .y neb megis ac i klywais i vy henna- 
viaid yn dywedied a gymerth ysgraf i wr boneddic a oedd yn trigo yn 
Mostyn o vewn plwyf Chwitford yn sir y fflint ynny man a elwir pwll 
pictun yn yr amser y gorvu ar yr iarll ddwyn baich o welld pyse ar i gefyn 
wrth vyned ir ysgraf hrag ovon i neb i gannvod ef kannis nid oedd eissiau 
pobyl ynni esbio ef ar hyd y gwledydd ynno neithyr y vo a ddiengis ir 
mor ynnyr sgraf hon ai harweddodd ef oddiynno i vryttain vechan yn 
vwy drwy gowreindeb yr iarll nog o gowreindeb llongwyr picktun." 

Ellis Griffith, History of Wales, in the Mostyn MSS. 



vii] THE WAR IN WALES 155 

of Crickhowel and Tretower, to be held in chief by the 
service of one knight's fee ; also of the " honour, castle, 
manor and borough of Dunster, together with other posses- 
sions of Sir James Luttrell, Sir Walter Rodney, and Sir 
John Seymour, in Somerset and Devon 1 ." The text of the 
grant is instructive in parts : 

" Whereas William Herbert holds to himself and his 
heirs the castles manors and lordships of Crickhowel and 
Tretower as of the king's castle and lordship of Dinas and 
Blaenllyfni which are parcels of the earldom of March, 
the king now releases all claim in the said castles, and grants 
that he may hold them in chief by the service of one knight's 
fee. His tenants shall be quit of attendance at courts 
within the said lordships, and he shall have power of ad- 
ministering justice." 

In 1464 parliament again called upon the Harlech garrison 
to submit. It was now known that John Dowbeggyng and 
Thomas Daniel, among the most unpopular of Henry VI's 
ministers, had taken refuge there. The summons stated 
that David ap Ieuan ap Eynon and Rheinallt ap Griffith 
ap Bleddyn harboured refugees, that they inspired commo- 
tions and gatherings against the king, and that the castle 
was used as a means of enabling the Lancastrians to enter 
the kingdom at their ease. Edward also issued a proclama- 
tion to the Mayor and Sheriff of Chester, which was to be 
read in the city on three consecutive days, threatening the 
defenders with the penalty of death unless they submitted 
before January 1, 1465 2 . 

During these years the garrisons of the North Wales 
towns were strengthened on account of the ever-present 
danger from the Lancastrians, and from Harlech in particular. 
Thomas Montgomery, constable of Carnarvon, had to keep 
24 soldiers there throughout the reign, while from 1455 
to 1458 there existed a separate town garrison of 12 under 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 268; June 12, 1463. Also ibid. 286; June 16, 1463. 
* Rot. Pari. 512. 



156 THE WAR IN WALES [ch. vii 

a distinct captain 1 . At times the two garrisons were united. 
There were similar town and castle garrisons at Beaumaris 
during these years, numbering 12 and 24 respectively, 
under the direction of the constable. So also at Conway. 



APPENDIX TO CHAPTER VII 

The following were protected in the Act of Resumption of 1464-5. 
John Wynne, officer of the household ; Walter Mathew, Richard 
Gwynedd, Howel David, and John Howel, officers of the household ; 
John Goch, yeoman of the larder ; Morris Gethin, of the amobrship 
of the North Wales counties ; William Gronow, of an annuity of 
six marks of the toll of Presteign ; Rees Vaughan, of an annuity 
of £j of the toll of Radyr ; John Newborough, keeper of the artillery 
and gunner of the North Wales towns ; John and Hugh Lloyd of 
Denbigh, of an annuity of 5 marks granted by Richard, duke of 
York, from the lordship of Denbigh ; Henry Trahaiarn ap Ievan 
ap Meurig, John ap Jenkyn ap Madoc, William Cemmaes, William ap 
Howel ap Thomas, John ap Morgan, Jankyn ap Thomas, John ap 
Jankyn, Meredith ap Morgan, William ap Morgan ap David Gam, 
John ap Gwilym, William ap Morgan, William ap Hopkyn, Howel 
Davy, Jankyn ap Howel ap Ievan, Jankyn ap Ievan ap Llywelyn ; 
William ap Morgan, David ap Gwilym, Thomas Herbert esquire 
of the body, of 50 marks a year ; Sir Thomas Vaughan, of lands 
in Kent, etc. ; Thomas the elder, of the constableship of Gloucester ; 
Thomas the younger, of the bailiwick of Guisnes in Picardy ; John 
Davy, of an annuity of £20 from the town of Montgomery ; Morris 
Arnold, Howel ap Meredith ap Howel, David Vaughan, Howel 
Swrdwal, Thomas ap Rosser, Thomas ap Madoc, Henry ap Griffith 
ap (? of) Ewyas, Griffith ap Richard of Builth, of an annuity of 100s. 

Of the above, Thomas Herbert, the younger, was probably the 
son of Lord Herbert's brother ; while Howel Swrdwal was the poet 
of that name, whose works have recently been edited for the first 
time, though this fact has escaped the editor. 

1 See Lewis. Mediaeval Boroughs. Henry Bolde was Governor of 
Conway in 1461. 



CHAPTER VIII 

WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 

At the accession of Edward IV " old maxims of govern- 
Anew ment and policy were tardily expiring, and 

era - the forces of a new era were in their season 

gathering to a head." The old maxims implied baronial 
and feudal supremacy, buttressed by serried ranks of 
retainers ; the new era implied the absolutism of the king, 
guided by the dark and labyrinthine manoeuvres of men 
of intellect, many of whom were raised from obscurity 
for the purpose. " The king " said Warwick, when he 
could no longer tolerate the arrogance of the new men, 
" estranges great lords from his council and takes about 
him others not of their blood, inclining only to their counsel." 
Against the peril of the new monarchy the ponderous energy 
of the old aristocracy revived and struggled with desperate 
resourcefulness and heroism under the leadership of that 
feudal Goliath, the great earl of Warwick, until, after 
a last fleeting success at Banbury, it reached its dramatic 
close at Barnet. 

The most aggressive exponent of Edward IV's new 
, principle of absolute rule was William Herbert, 

Constitutional r r ' 

position of his confidential friend and adviser. Others 

Lord Herbert. 

were raised to eminence as a counterpoise 
to the prodigious might of Warwick, but none from such 
meagre beginnings as Herbert. Of him it must be said 
that he owed his advance less to lineage than to sheer 
ability and proficiency in the tortuous paths of intrigue. 



158 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

He suited the temper of the times. We must regard him 
as the forerunner of Wolsey and Thomas Cromwell. The 
victory at Mortimer's Cross, opportunely followed by the 
accession of the Yorkists, opened before him a startling 
vista. A man of his silent assiduity and serpentine methods 
was not slow to grasp opportunities thrown in his way. 
Herbert and Warwick, then, dominated the crisis which 
was already looming large in the political firmament, and 
by a strange irony both protagonists perished in the strife, 
though it was the cause of Herbert that triumphed. 

In some measure Herbert owed his rise to Warwick. 
Herbert's debt After his triumph at the battle of Northampton 
to Warwick. ^g i a t_t er was supreme in England. His 
glory had then reached its mid-day splendour. At that 
very moment Herbert, as we have seen, held in Glamorgan 
as a gift from the Lancastrians positions which were Warwick's 
to bestow. The earl could easily and rightfully have 
reclaimed them, and given the leadership of South Wales 
to another. He did not do so. Instead, he commissioned 
Herbert to arm South Wales against Jasper. The tale 
of how that commission fructified at Mortimer's Cross 
has already been unfolded. 

From that moment onwards Warwick and Herbert 
took divergent ways. Warwick fought the king's battles 
and largely managed his diplomatic affairs. He therefore 
cut an imposing figure in the public eye. Herbert, on the 
contrary, was the courtier. He had the ear of his king. 
We get a glimpse of his power in the inner circle of court 
life in 1463. This record narrates how Lord Clynton, 
in advancing his claim to the patronage of the Benedictine 
priory of Folkestone, threatens the town with reprisals, 
and clinches his threat by saying that he had the support 
of " Lord Herbert and others of the king's council 1 ." It 
is a brief though illuminating illustration of the part Herbert 
was already playing. 

1 Hist. MSS. Commission. Fifth Report, 590-1 (1463). 



viii] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 159 

We suspect too that the commercial legislation of this year 
„. found in Herbert a strong advocate if, indeed, 

His com- ° ' ' 

merciai it was not actually inspired by him. It must 

interests. 

certainly have been due to the initiative of men 
who, like himself, were interested in commerce. Parliament 
enacted, for instance, that trade with foreign countries 
should not be carried on in foreign bottoms if native ships 
were available ; and Herbert owned a number of merchant 
ships which traded with Ireland and foreign parts. In 
this connection we may note a curious piece of information 
contained in a grant to Lord Herbert " of all gear, fittings, 
wines etc. on a great ship called the Gabriell which he had 
sent at great expense to foreign parts and which on its 
return from thence to England laden with divers wines and 
merchandise was wrecked on the coast of Ireland 1 ." The 
king, too, alive to the interest of commerce, did not disdain 
to take part in trade and to compete with other merchants. 
The traders were rapidly rising in influence and wealth, 
and they found in Edward and his confidential adviser 
not only active supporters, but also at times dangerous 
competitors. This common interest, while it bound the 
king and Herbert, was directly antagonistic to the 
interests and traditions of Warwick and the old 
aristocracy. 

It served Herbert's purpose that the king cherished 
with enduring loyalty those whom he chose to honour with 
his friendship. Thus, when the estrangement between 
Edward and Warwick began to swell to a flood of enmity 
on the secret marriage with Elizabeth Woodville in May 
1464, Herbert's position was strengthened in proportion 
as that of the earl was weakened. To celebrate the king's 
The marriage wealth and honours were showered 

woodviiies. upon the queen's relatives. One was married 
to the young duke of Buckingham ; another to a Bourchier, 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, March 23, 1465; 427. All wrecks of sea were the 
property of the king. 



160 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

the son of the earl of Essex ; a third to a Grey of Ruthin, 
the son of the earl of Kent 1 . 

Such alliances were a servere strain upon the loyalty 
TT ,_ , of the mightiest baron in England. But what- 

Herbert s son ° _ ° 

marries the ever Warwick's mortification on their account, 
it was deeply embittered by the favour shown 
to Herbert ; for Herbert had none of the halo of ancestry 
which encircled a Stafford or a Bourchier. At Windsor, 
in September, 1466, Herbert's son and heir, William, was 
married to the queen's sister, Mary Woodville, amid profuse 
magnificence. He was also given the title of Lord Dunster. 
At the same time Herbert's daughter was given in marriage 
to the young Lord Lisle. These arrangements, we are 
told, gave secret displeasure to Warwick 2 . 

Now Warwick, as heir to the earldom of Salisbury, could 
have preferred a claim of his own to the title 

Herbert as x 

the king's of Lord Mohun of Dunster ; and, as already 

cidviscr, 

stated, the Dunster estates in Somerset, Dorset, 
and Devon had already been bestowed upon Lord Herbert 
in June 1463. Every favour given to Herbert seemed, 
with peculiar insolence, to detract from the prestige of 
Warwick. There can be no doubt that the former was 
now to a large extent wielding the destinies of the House 
of York. Others might wear the trappings of office, but 
Herbert was the man at the wheel. He was, as William of 
Worcester describes him at this period, the king's most 
trusted adviser ; not a plaything like a Gaveston or a 

1 William of Worcester, Annales, 786. It has already been stated 
that Warwick had endeavoured to influence Elizabeth Woodville to 
marry Sir Hugh John of Swansea. See a letter from Warwick to her 
in Archaeologia, 1842, 132-3. The partiality of Edward for new men is 
reflected as early as the winter of 1461. Paston Letters. 

2 William of Worcester, Annales, 786. | ] Septembris factum est mari- 
tagium apud Wyndesore inter filium et heredem domini Herberd et Mariam 
sororem reginae Elizabethae, ac inter juvenem dominum de Lisle et 
filiam ejusdem domini Herberd. Fecitque dominus rex haeredem Herberd 
militem ac creavit eum dominum de Dunstarre, ad secretam displicentiam 
comitis Warrwici ac magnatum terrae. Lord Lisle was the son of John 
Talbot, Viscount Lisle, who was killed at Chatillon in 1453. He was 
ten years of age when he succeeded to the viscountcy in July 1453. 



vin] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 161 

Despenser, but a silent, calculating, resolute agent in the 
hands of Edward to extricate the Crown from the meshes 
of feudalism. His was the task of fashioning a new monarchy 
and not of rejuvenating the old. 

In 1467 events developed with alarming rapidity. 
Early in the summer of that year gorgeous jousts were 
held at Smithfield to grace the visit of the Bastard of Bur- 
gundy with whom Edward was negotiating an alliance. 
The Nevilles stood severely aloof, while Herbert figured 
prominently among the king's inner circle of friends. Of 
more sinister significance was the removal of Warwick's 
brother George, archbishop of York, from the chancellor- 
ship. On June 8 Edward, accompanied by Herbert and 
a few others, went in person to the archbishop's inn at 
Charing Cross to demand from him the Great Seal 1 . 
The archbishop was impeached, and some time later 
Sir Thomas Vaughan and Sir William Parr were sent 
by the king to take possession of his manor of 
Moore 2 . 

Edward's resolve, on commercial if on no other grounds, 
to stand for friendship with Burgundy rather than with 
France, widened the breach between Warwick and Herbert ; 
while the blunt diplomatic proceedings which produced 
it gave unnecessary ruggedness to the severance. For 
Warwick, who had been in France negotiating with Louis XI, 
and incidentally intriguing with him, had been kept in 
ignorance of the Burgundian embassy to England. When 
he returned with the French ambassadors Edward treated 
them with gross incivility. They had brought with them 
presents of gold and jewellery ; Edward sent them back 
with presents of hunting-horns and leather bottles. 

1 William of Worcester, Annates, 786. 

2 Warkworth, 25. January 5, 14.67-8, Thomas Vaughan was Treasurer 
of the Chamber, and treated for peace with Burgundy. On February 4, 
1470, the duke of Burgundy acknowledges the receipt of the order of the 
Garter from him at Ghent. Rymer, xi. 651. He was appointed on the 
council of the Prince of Wales, July 8, 1471. Cal. Pat. Rolls. See also 
Grants of Edward V, xvi; and Archaeologia, xxvi. 277. 

E. W. R. It 



i62 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

" As they rowed home in their barge the Frenchmen 
Warwick's na d many discourses with each other. But 
resentment. Warwick was so wrath that he could not contain 
himself ; and he said to the admiral of France, ' Have 
you not seen what traitors are about the king's person ? ' 
But the admiral answered, ' My lord, I pray you, wax 
not hot ; for some day you shall be well avenged.' But 
the earl said, ' Know that those very traitors were the men 
who have had my brother displaced from the office of 
chancellor, and made the king take the seal from him 1 .' " 

These events, doubtless, convinced Warwick that he 
Warwick must eventually appeal to the arbitrament 

wUh S the S °f the sword. Then an unusual circumstance 

Lancastrians, occurred which made the antagonism between 
him and Herbert at once more personal and more envenomed. 
A certain person was captured in Wales carrying letters 
from Queen Margaret to Harlech. Lord Herbert, whose 
unsleeping vigilance was equalled only by his unscrupulous 
daring, had him sent up to London to be examined. In 
consequence of his depositions Warwick was accused of 
treachery, and of being in secret communication with the 
Lancastrians, accusations which the earl indignantly repelled. 
The prisoner was sent to Middleham to be interrogated 
by the earl, and the accusations were dismissed as 
frivolous 2 . 

The incident served to sharpen the blade of Warwick's 
anger against the courtier through whose instrumentality 
the charge had arisen. The charge raised in his breast 
a tempest of warring emotions that carried him in poignant 
rage away from court to his seat at Middleham. For some 
time he refused to return even under safe conduct. Perhaps 

1 Wavrin, 1447-71, 545. 

2 William of Worcester, Annates, 788-9. Quidam fuit captus in 
Wallia (portans) litteras a regina Margareta ad castrum Hardlaughe, 
missusque Londinium per dominum Herberd ad regem, qui accusavit. . . . 
inter alios comitem Warrwici quod audivit suspiciosa verba ultra mare 
quod idem comes faveret parti reginae Margaretae. 



viii] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 163 

this was Herbert's stroke of retaliation ; for Warwick, 
it seems, had been the main obstacle in preventing him 
receiving the wardship of Lord Bonville's daughter and 
heiress for his eldest son 1 . Not long afterwards (January, 
1468) a reconciliation was effected between Warwick, 
Herbert, and others at Coventry. The reconciliation was 
short-lived. The situation was now becoming critical. 
Herbert had been assiduously endeavouring to raise the 
temperature that his projects might prosper ; but the 
fuel which the spy had added to the flame was such as 
consumed Herbert himself. 

If Herbert was gifted with the more subtle intellect, 
The lordship Warwick was better harnessed for war. The 
of Ragian. king, no doubt, realised this, and set himself 

to remedy it as far as possible by lavishing grants upon 
his favourite. In 1465 Herbert received part of the royal 
lordship of Usk, " with certain villeins, bondmen, and bond- 
women of the king with their issues 2 " ; and also part of 
the royal lordship of Monmouth. These, being added to 
the Raglan estate, considerably enlarged that patrimony : 
' They shall form one united royal lordship called the lord- 
ship of Raglan held in chief by the service of one knight's 
fee, and the said William and his heirs shall have within 
the said limits all royal rights." On September 26, 1466, he 
was given other lands in South Wales, as well as the reversion 
of the estates of his half-brother William Herbert if he 
should die without heirs 3 . 

1 Hall, 273-4. Cecille Bonville, the only child of William Bonville, 
Lord Haryngton, was the heiress of the Bonville and Haryngton estates. 
William Bonville was married to Catherine Neville, Warwick's sister. 
Worcester, 790-1. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, March 9, 425. The patent gives a minute description 
of the boundary. "And whereas Herbert holds in chief the lordship of 
Raglan and the manors of Penclauth, Metheny, as of the lordship of Usk, 
and the manor of Dyngestowe as of the lordship of Monmouth, the king 
releases him of all rents and services," etc. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 533. Anabill, Pyll, Steynton, Copped Bush, Thywode, 
Lamburston. The manor of Haverfordwest, and a third of St Briavel's. 
His offices of chamberlain and chief justice of South Wales, and steward 
of royal lordships, were confirmed at the same time. 

II — 2 



164 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

On August 28, 1467, he became constable of Denbigh, 
h rb rt-s an( ^ s ^ ewar "d of Denbigh, Montgomery, Ceri and 

power Cedewain, and chief justice of North Wales 1 . 

The chief justiceship of North Wales had pre- 
viously (1461) been given to John, earl of Worcester, who now 
in compensation received a grant of £200 from the issues of 
South Wales. About the same time Herbert received the 
wardship of the lands of Richard Grey, Lord Powys, and of 
the lands of Sir Thomas Talbot 2 . Further illustration of how 
the Herberts dominated Wales may be found in the names 
of the commissioners for North and South Wales touching 
clippings and falsifications of money. These were Lord 
Herbert, Devereux, Sir Richard Herbert, Sir Roger Vaughan, 
Thomas Herbert, John Herbert, Thomas Morgan, John 
Milewater, Thomas ap Rosser, Henry Griffith, and Morgan 
ap Jankyn ap Philip 3 . 

In North Wales the chief men upon whom Edward could 
rely were David Mathew, William Griffith, William Bulkeley, 
and John ap Meredith. In 1466 the three last mentioned, 
together with Griffith ap Robin, were ordered to inquire 
into the report that the greater part of the revenues and 
rents of Carnarvonshire and Merionethshire, and the fines 
of the great tourns in North Wales had not been paid during 
the reign and that the tenants refused to pay their rents 4 . 
Harlech largely accounted for this defiance of authority. 

The reconciliation between Warwick and the court 



1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 41, 136; Thomas Salesbury, younger, was made 
constable of Denbigh on January 23, 1466. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 1467; 41, 49. Viscount Lisle was Talbot's heir. 

8 Ibid. 54, 57. October 27, and August 14, 1467. For confirmation 
of grants to Richard Herbert, see ibid. February 5, 1465, e.g. Grove, 
Monnington, etc. Henry ap Griffith was on a commission, March 28, 
1465, to ascertain what castles and manors had belonged to Wiltshire. 
Ibid. 451. Thomas Morgan, and Herbert's half-brother, John ap Gwilym 
(or William), were on another commission touching felonies in Chepstow 
on May 11, 1467. Ibid. 29. 

4 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 529. William Griffith and Middleton took a muster 
of 700 archers of the earl of Worcester's retinue at Beaumaris, August 
18, 1467, ibid. ; and on August 3, 1475, inquired into all shipments of 
wool, hides, etc. from North Wales. Ibid. 490. 



viii] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 165 

party was not only short-lived but superficial. The hostility 
to the Woodvilles was deepening. Edward's alliance with 
Burgundy, and especially the marriage of his sister Margaret 
to Duke Charles the Bold, brought Edward to the verge 
of war with France, whose wily sovereign once more stirred 
up the dynastic strife in England. There was an active 
correspondence carried on between the Lancastrian exiles 
and their friends at home. Several arrests were made 
in the early summer of 1468. 

On this flood-tide of dissatisfaction, intrigue, and 
„ A revolt, Jasper Tudor, about the end of June, 

Jasper Tudor ' O r > j » 

lands in landed near Harlech, probably at Barmouth 

where he had a steady adherent in Griffith 
Vaughan. Jasper had with him " fifty persons and a few 
pence 1 ." The little force had been conveyed in three 
ships, one of which, on its return to Normandy, was captured 
by a skilful manoeuvre on the part of Lord Herbert 2 . 
Jasper probably proceeded to Harlech for reinforcements, 
for the garrison there was still unsubdued 3 . 

We fail to see any authority for Ramsay's statement 
that Jasper " was unable to make his way to Harlech 
because the fortress was beleaguered by Lord Herbert." 
As a matter of fact Herbert's force did not arrive in North 
Wales till later. If Herbert had been there at the time 
of Jasper's arrival he ought surely to have been able to 
prevent the landing of such an insignificant party. Tudur 
Penllyn states that Griffith Vaughan was Jasper's chief 
agent in North Wales — and he certainly was one of the 
defenders of Harlech — and that he had a fortified home- 
stead near Barmouth, a convenient landing-place a few 
miles south of Harlech. It is most likely, therefore, 

1 William of Worcester, Annales, 791. 

Yno i daw'n arglwydd llawen. 

Tudur Penllyn, MSS. 
i.e. "There (Harlech) our chief will land." 

2 William of Worcester; subtili modo. 

s William of Worcester, Annales, prope Hardlaughe. Tudur Penllyn, 
MSS. Ramsay, Lancaster and York, II. 333, is misleading. 



166 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

that Jasper landed at Barmouth. Nor was his progress 
stayed ; for he traversed North Wales as far as Denbigh. 

The people flocked to his standard, and he was soon 
His at the head of a considerable force 1 , with 

success. which he attacked that town. Denbigh was 

once again plundered and set on fire. The castle, of which 
Lord Herbert was now captain, apparently did not surrender 
to the Lancastrians, though Jasper was so far successful 
that he was able to hold sessions in the name of Henry VI 2 . 

It would be fastidious altogether to discard the evidence 
of contemporary Welsh poets on these events, some of 
whom give ample evidence of a close familiarity not only 
with the projects of Jasper himself, but also with the move- 
ments, prospective and otherwise, of the Lancastrians 
in England. Thus, Dafydd Llwyd, who was a man of 
estate as well as a poet, was obviously aware of Jasper's 
projected invasion. " The brave, long-haired invader will 
come with a fleet, and will hover around the North Wales 
coast after the Feast. Meanwhile, there will be disturbances 
in Kent before harvest-time, and the world will be in a 
turmoil. David ap Eynon (the ode is addressed to him) 
will keep Harlech true to Jasper and defy Edward 3 ." This 
statement is substantially verified by William of Worcester 
who gives the date of Jasper's landing as " immediately 
after the Feast of Saint John the Baptist 4 " (June 24). 
Moreover, there actually were disturbances in the south- 

1 William of Worcester estimated them at 2000, which is probably 
an exaggeration, though he is roughly in agreement with contemporary 
poets as to the number of Herbert's force which took Harlech soon after- 
wards. 

2 Gregory, 237. " He rode ovyr the contraye and helde many cessyons 
and cysys in Kyng Harry's name." 

3 Dafydd Llwyd, Cardiff MSS. 

A daw herwr dewr, hirwallt, 
A'i dai ar hyd y dwr hallt. 
Wedi'r wyl i daw'r eleirch 
I dir Kent cyn medi'r ceirch 
O flaen y byd aflonydd 
Coedcrai ar Fenai a fydd. 

4 William of Worcester, A nnales ; cito post f estum nativitatis Sancti 
Johannis Baptistae. 



vni] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 167 

east of England, as a result of which the earl of Oxford 
was sent to the Tower, and a few were put to death. 

Edward now realised the supreme importance of 
reducing Harlech. On July 3, 1468, he com- 
missioned Herbert to array the border counties 
of Gloucester, Hereford, and Salop, as well as the Marches, 
against Jasper 1 . There appears to be no record that any 
previous organised attempt had been made by Edward to 
subdue Harlech. A number of proclamations had been issued 
calling upon the garrison to surrender, but nothing further 
had been done ; and every overture had been met by 
an unequivocal refusal. The captain of the castle, de facto, 
was David ap Eynon, about whom there is no lack of fitting 
panegyrics in contemporary Welsh literature 2 , as well as in 
the prose writers of a later day. The latter especially can 
be consulted with amusement by those who are interested 
in the picturesque fables which gathered around his name 
a century or so later. He is supposed to have held castles 
in France until all the old women of Wales spoke of it 3 . 
Strangely enough, among the glistening array of Welsh 
captains who distinguished themselves at one time or another 
in the French wars, the name of this hero is found wanting. 
Historically his fame must rest upon his unrivalled loyalty 
to the cause of Lancaster when every fortress in the kingdom 
had long since thrown in its lot with the fortunes of the 
House of York. 

Jasper Tudor was still at large in North Wales when 
he was attacked by the Herberts with a considerable 
force variously estimated at between seven and ten 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls (1467-72), 103, 127. The date of Herbert's com- 
mission again falsifies Ramsay's statement already alluded to. 

2 For example, Dafydd Llwyd : 

Ni bu erioed a barr on 
Wr gowirach i'r goron. Cardiff MSS. 
8 Pennant, 11. 12 1-2. Autobiography of Lord Herbert of Cherbury 
(Lee), 6-8. I see no evidence that David ap Eynon ever held a castle in 
France. 

4 His name appears in records of Inquisition for Merionethshire, 
1453-6. Arch. Camb. 1848, 69. 



1 68 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

thousand 1 . There is no great disparity between the estimates 
jasper Tudor °f the poets and the chroniclers. The army 
defeated. was divided into two, possibly three, invading 

forces. One, under Richard Herbert, approached Harlech 
along the North Wales coast. Having reached Denbigh 
this force appears to have collided with Jasper's some- 
where between that town and the Conway valley. A 
number of prisoners were taken and twenty of them put 
to death. There is significant allusion to the executions 
in the tales of a later day. One story narrates how seven 
brothers were executed in Anglesey in spite of the prayers 
and earnest entreaties of the mother that at least one should 
be spared. Thereupon, with a pair of woollen beads on 
her arms, she fell on her knees and cursed the earl (Herbert) ; 
" which curse fell upon him at Banbury 2 ." 

The army pursued its course up the Conway valley, 
ravaging it with fire and sword. The entire Snowdon 
district experienced such unparalleled desolation that it 
had barely recovered more than a century later. Echoes 
of the slaughter still survive in song and story. Wynne, 
writing nearly a century and a half after the events, says 
" the print is yet extant, the very stones of manie habitations 
in and along my demaynes carrying yet the colour of the 

1 William of Worcester, Annales, 791, gives 10,000: ad custus domini 
regis, cum numero decern millium armatorum. Guto'r Glyn says " 9000 
yeomen." See poem in Records of Denbigh, 202-3. Another bard of the 
time, Hywel Dafydd ap Ieuan ap Rhys, estimates the force at 7000. 

Tynu a gwyr tonau gwin. 

Also: Saethu 'mhob parth saith mil pen. 

"Men draw from men waves of wine, arrows fly in every quarter from 
7000 men." 

The above poem is quoted in Warkworth, 33, 35, notes ; but is attri- 
buted wrongly to Lewis Glyn Cothi. The sum paid to Herbert for the 
siege of Harlech, ^7177, also suggests a large force. Issues, 9 Edward IV. 
On December 6, 1468, Lord Herbert was given the reversion of certain 
manors because the king owed him £3168. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 132. 

2 William of Worcester, Annales, 791. Guto'r Glyn suggests three 
divisions of the army. 

Tair cad aeth o'r teir gwlad tau 
Trwy Wynedd fel taranau. 
There is much tradition in Wynne's Gwydir Family, and in Lord 
Herbert of Cherbury's Autobiography, 6-8. 



viii] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 169 

fire." The whole borough of Llanrwst in the Con way- 
valley was consumed, and the devastation was followed 
by a plague 1 . 

While Richard Herbert had been dealing with Jasper 
Hariech Lord Herbert himself had advanced north- 

surrenders, wards from Pembroke, taking the old Roman 
road, Sarn Helen. There was very little resistance, though 
one experienced warrior in Herbert's army, Philip Vaughan 
of Hay, was killed during the siege 2 . On August 14 the 
castle surrendered at discretion. " That castylle ys so 
stronge that men sayde that hyt was impossybylle unto 
any man to gete hyt 3 ." 

Fifty of the garrison were taken prisoners and conveyed 
to the Tower of London by Lord Herbert. Amongst them 
were three knights, namely, Sir Richard Tunstall, Sir 
Henry Bellingham, and Sir William Stoke. Two of the 
prisoners, Troublote and Thomas Elwick, were executed 
by Rivers who was constable of England 4 . It is noteworthy 
that the captain David ap Eynon did not suffer the extreme 
penalty, and tradition ascribes the leniency with which 
he was treated to the influence of the Herberts. He was 
Edward's received into favour and actually found reward 

clemency. a f ew y ears later 5 ; as also did the family 

1 Wynne's Gwydir Family, 49-50, 66. Guto'r Glyn : 

Tros greigiau mae d'olau di; 
Tir ar i gwnaent Eryri. 
Od ennynaist dan ennyd 
Drwy ladd ac ymladd i gyd, 
Dyrnod anufudd-dod fu, 
Darnio Gwynedd a'i dyrnu. 
Harlech a Dinbech pob dor yn cynneu, 
Nanconwy yn farwor. 
Also, Hywel Dafydd ap Ieuan ap Rhys : 
Dareni daiar Wynedd. 

2 Guto'r Glyn, in Records of Denbigh, 202-3. William of Worcester, 
Itinerarium, 328. 

3 Gregory, 237, and William of Worcester, Annates. 

* Gregory, 237. Brief Latin Chronicle, 182, states that Tunstall was 
pardoned by the king ; William of Worcester, 791, says that he was executed. 

6 In 14 Edward IV Prince Edward gave him licence to hold lands in 
Kynnowys. Hist. MSS. Commission; Puleston MSS., in Arch. Camb. 
1880, 150. Autobiography of Lord Herbert of Cherbury, 6-8. 



170 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

of Jasper's ardent follower, Griffith Vaughan 1 . levari 
ap Robert ap Meredith of Carnarvonshire was also invited 
to accept a pardon 2 . He was a sturdy adherent of Jasper, 
and had wrought considerable mischief to those who had 
yielded to Edward in North Wales. It is obvious, there- 
fore, that Edward dealt with commendable clemency 
with this recalcitrant garrison. On December i, 1468, 
he issued a general pardon to all. 

Herbert found his reward in the earldom of Pembroke, 
„• . to which he was raised on September 8, 1468 3 . 

Herbert made r ' ' 

ean of The wily Jasper once more evaded his pursuers. 

Pembroke. ,. 

Ihe olde Lorde Jasper and sum tyme erle 
of Pembroke was in Walys. Men wene that he was not 
oute of Walys whenn that the Lord Herberde come with 
hys oste ; but favyr at sum tyme dothe grete ease, as hit 
jasper y s prevyd by the hydynge of that lorde sum 

escapes. tyme Erie of Pembroke 4 ." Tradition says 

that he escaped to Brittany from the house of Griffith 
Vaughan. 

The young earl of Richmond, whom a stroke of luck 
The eari of was soon to make the most important Lan- 

Richmond. castrian in the realm, came now, if he had 

not come before, into Herbert's hands. As we have seen, 
Herbert had already been given the custody of the earl's 
estates during his minority ; but the boy's movements 
are wrapped in obscurity, and we cannot be certain that 
Herbert secured his person until after the fall of Harlech. 
It is interesting to note that Herbert intended to marry 
him to his daughter Maud ; for one of the clauses in his 
will states " I will that Maud my daughter shall be married 
to the Lord Henry of Richmond 5 ." This project, dictated 

1 His son Reginald received an annuity of four marks from the issues 
of Chirk, from Richard, duke of Gloucester, March 26, 1471. Arch. Camb., 
1863, 55; and 1875. 

2 Original document in Wynne, 50. 

3 William of Worcester, 791. * Gregory, 237. 

5 Herbert's will ; Powys Club Collections, 11. Appendix, xviii. Another 
daughter was to be married to Lord Powys. 



viii] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 171 

alike by a natural solicitude for the welfare of his children, 
and by a clear perception of the possible contingencies 
of the future, was not too ambitious even for a new man 
who had married his son to the queen's sister ; while it 
was certainly in harmony with the king's own policy of 
courting the Lancastrians. 

Herbert may have been alive also to the passionate 
Herbe a- appeal of the leaders of Welsh public opinion 

a national that Wales should not be made the cockpit 

of contending English factions, but should 
seek to unite in an endeavour to rid the country of the 
baneful rule of English officials. To the poets there 
was no dynastic question. Now that Herbert stood in 
solitary pre-eminence, they appealed to him as fervently as 
they had appealed to Jasper to achieve unity in Wales. As 
far as Wales was concerned there could be no happier union 
than that of the Tudors and the Herberts. In the whole 
range of fifteenth-century Welsh literature there is no more 
fervent longing for leadership, unity, and patriotism, than 
that of Guto'r Glyn in an ode written immediately after 
the fall of Harlech. " Tax not Anglesey beyond what 
it can bear. Let not the Saxon rule in Gwynedd and 
Flint. Confer no office upon the descendants of Horsa. 
Appoint as constables of castles throughout Wales men 
of thine own nation. Make Glamorgan and Gwynedd, 
from Conway to Neath, a united whole. And should 
England resent it, Wales will rally to thy side 1 ." 

1 Na fwrw dreth ar Fon draw 
Ni ellir ei chynnulliaw. 
N'ad trwy Wynedd blant Rhonwen 
Na phlant Hors yn y Ffiint hen. 
N'ad, f'arglwydd, swydd, i un Sais, 
Na'i bardwn i un bwrdais. 
Kymmer o wyr Kymru 'rowron 
Bob cwnstabl o Fenstabl i Fon. 
Dwc Forgannwc a Gwynedd, 
Gwna'n un o Gonwy i Nedd. 
O digia Lloegr a'i dugiaid, 
Kymry a dry yn dy raid. 

Guto'r Glyn in Cein. Lien. Gymreig, 192. 



172 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

The interests of a large number of Edward's Welsh 
adherents were safeguarded in the parliament of 1467-8 l . 
Many of them received additional grants. In September 
Rewards and Lord Herbert acquired Chepstow castle by 
pardons. a g ra nt from the duke of Norfolk 2 ; in October 

he was given power to make a weir across the Thames 
from Paternoster Lane to the Surrey side 3 ; in November 
he was made master-forester of Snowdon, and constable 
of Conway, and captain of the town ; in April, 1469, he 
was made chamberlain of North Wales 4 . 

Another Welsh Yorkist who remained in favour was 
Roger Kynaston. He and Roger Eyton, late sheriff of 
Salop, were given a general pardon in March, 1466 6 . In 



1 Rot. Pari, sub ann. 

Sir Roger Vaughan, of the lands of Philip Mansel and Hopkyn ap 
Rhys; Cantrelly, Llangoid, Alexander's Town, reversion of Penkelly. 

Morris Arnold, of 40 marks from Monmouth town. 

Thomas Herbert of the lands of Mulle in Gloucester. 

Thomas Vaughan, son of Sir Roger Vaughan. He, together with Lord 
Dunster, and John Herbert, were on a commission on December 6, 1468, 
to hold the reversion of certain manors for Lord Herbert, on the death 
of the wife of Sir William Beaumont. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 132. 

John Dwnn of Laugharne (Talaugharne), Cleygyn, Pybour, " for his 
services to the duke of York, and against Jasper." See also Cal. Pat. 
Rolls, November 9, 1467 ; and March 11, 1465 ; 430-1. On August 9, 1463, 
a John Donne was on a commission to investigate complaints of Spanish 
merchants. Ibid. 301. 

Thomas Vaughan, yeoman of the Crown, of Gerardestown, in Car- 
diganshire (granted, 1465-6). 

Richard ap Rhys, of 10 marks a year (granted, 1465-6). 

Hugh Lloyd and John Lloyd, of grants in the counties of Carnarvon 
and Merioneth. 

Howel Davy and John Howel his son, and John Davy, of grants in 
Montgomery. 

Morris Gethin, of the amobrship of North Wales counties. 

Richard Herbert. 

John ap Ieuan ap Llywelyn, of an annuity of 10 marks from Radnor. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, September 12, 1468. 

3 Ibid. October 12, 1468; in. 

4 Ibid. 113, with payment for 24 soldiers. On May 3, 1469, he was 
confirmed in the possession of Chepstow, Gower, Swansea, Kilvey, and 
Lougher, which places he acquired by a writ "precipe in capite." Ibid. 
154, 163; and passim, for grants to Devereux. 

6 Ibid. 98, 518. A commission was given to Herbert and Shrewsbury 
to arrest Kynaston and bring him before the Council, August 28, 1467. 
Eyton was constable of Shrewsbury in June 1467. Distinguish this 
Kynaston from one of the same name, of Walford. 



viii] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 173 

March of this year Edward pardoned a Pembrokeshire 
gentleman, Richard Bennet or Hugh of Monkton, who 
apparently had been Jasper's adherent 1 . His clemency 
extended even to Roger Puleston 2 , Jasper's old friend, 
also described as Roger ap John. 

The winter of 1468-9 was characterised by disturbances, 
Warwick's arrests, and executions, which were due largely 
grievance. ^ Q ^g ^ ar k machinations of Warwick. Herbert's 

supremacy in the councils of the king was now an abiding 
challenge to aristocratic self-esteem, and Warwick was deter- 
mined to remove him and his chief associate, Lord Rivers 3 . 
For their " mischievous rule, opinion, and assent have caused 
our sovereign lord and the realm to fall in great poverty, 
disturbing the ministration of the laws, and only intending 
to their own promotion and enriching. The said seditious 
persons have caused our sovereign lord to spend the goods 
of our holy father, and have advised him to give of his 
livelihood to them above their degrees. The king estranges 
great lords from his council and takes about him others 
not of their blood, inclining only to their counsel 4 ." Although 
there were other grievances such as the close friendship 
between Edward and Charles, duke of Burgundy, the kernel 
of Warwick's complaint was the king's partiality for the 
new men. "It is to reasons of this nature that may be 
attributed the overthrow and slaughter of the Welsh 5 ." 

Warwick succeeded in detaching Edward's brother, 
the duke of Clarence, from the court party, and before 
committing himself irretrievably he made certain the 
allegiance of his royal ally by marrying him to his daughter, 
Isabella Neville, which was accomplished at Calais on 

1 Ibid. 515. 

2 Ibid. 152, March 28, 1469. 

3 Third Croyland Continuator, 457—8. Paston Letters, n. 326. From 
the latter it appears that Herbert was at court on October 28, 1468, and 
about to depart, probably for his Welsh seat. " Sende me worde if my 
lorde of Pembrok be go." 

* See the letter of Clarence and Warwick, 12 July, 1469 ; Warkworth, 46. 
5 Third Croyland Continuator, 457-8. 



174 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch 

July ii, 1469. On the following day the letter or manifesto 
already referred to was issued in the names of Clarence 
and Warwick, allusion being made also to the " covetous 
rule and guiding of certain seditious persons." The two 
announced their intention of appearing at Canterbury 
on July 16, to lay their grievances before the king. 

Meanwhile the earl of Warwick had already set his 
Robin of northern friends in motion under the standard 

Redesdaie. f " Robin of Redesdale 1 ." These marched 

southwards in strong force. On hearing of their advance 
Edward summoned Herbert with reinforcements from Wales, 
whither he had repaired towards the end of October 2 . 
He himself set out on a progress through the eastern counties, 
going northwards as far as Stamford and Newark. The 
attitude of the people becoming increasingly hostile, he 
returned to Nottingham 3 . There he appears to have stayed 
for some days after July 9 awaiting reinforcements. Hum- 
phrey Stafford of Southwick, who had recently (May) 
received the earldom of Devon, was ordered to enrol the 
levies of Somersetshire and Devonshire 4 . These consisted 
mainly of archers. It is curious, in view of the prominence 
of the Welsh archer in the French wars, that there were 
few, if any, of this arm in Herbert's contingent 5 . 

Guto'r Glyn introduces us to a feast held by the Herberts 
on the eve of their departure. Internal evidence 

Herbert sets x 

out towards proves that the poem was composed at the 
time, or shortly afterwards, and certainly 
before the catastrophe at Edgecote. It is here stated 
that Herbert, at the head of a strong force, marched to 
Gloucester ; and that his objects were the suppression 
of a rising of the common people, and to defend the king 

1 Warkworth, 6-7, says Sir William Conyers adopted this name. 
See also Introduction to Paston Letters. Hearne's Fragment, 24, mentions 
Lord Latimer as the captain of the band. He was Warwick's uncle. 

2 See ante. Hall, 273-4. 

3 Third Croyland Continuator, 445-6. 

4 Hearne's Fragment, 24. 

5 Warkworth. Hearne's Fragment. 



vni] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 175 

against the earl of Warwick. The poet, moreover, is sincere 
and candid in his admission that Herbert was the object 
of intense hatred in England. And there can be no reason- 
able doubt that Guto'r Glyn derived his information from 
the Herberts themselves 1 . 

From Gloucester the earl of Pembroke (Herbert) advanced 
to a place called Cottishold 2 . Perhaps the chronicler 
refers vaguely to the Cotswold Hills. Very possibly the 
allusion may be to the spot where Cotswold House now 
stands, five miles from Cirencester, on the line of the Roman 
road (Ermin Street) from Gloucester, which joins the Fosse- 
way at Cirencester. Curiously enough, there is a lane 
called the " Welsh Way " joining the two roads a little 
above Cirencester. At Cottishold Pembroke was joined 
by the earl of Devon. The combined armies thereupon 
continued their march towards Northampton. It seems 
impossible to give an exact estimate of the numbers of 
the troops employed ; chroniclers' figures are always suspi- 
cious, and there appears to be no means of checking them. 
The estimates of Herbert's contingent vary from 6000 
(Hall) to 13,000 (Warkworth). Meanwhile, the northerners 
were said to be making for the same point as the royalists — 
Northampton. 

The Welsh contingent were said to be " the best in 
The weish Wales." They were drawn mainly from Gwent 
force - (Monmouthshire), Brecknock, Gower, Pem- 

brokeshire, and the neighbourhood of Kidwely. There 
were no men of note from the royal counties of Carmarthen 

1 Guto'r Glyn, "I Wledd." Cardiff MSS. 

Wrth ofn Iarll yr aeth fy ner 

I Gaerloyw a'r gwyr lawer. 

Ofni Lloegr, ein un llygad, 

Ai bribwyr oil yn bwrw brad. 

Blino y maent o'm blaenawr 

Blant Ronwen, genfigen fawr. 
" My lord with many troops advanced to Gloucester on account of the 
Earl. I fear lest he be the victim of treachery. The people of England 
have harassed our leader, and he is the object of deep malice." 

2 Hall, 273. ' 



176 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [CH. 

and Pembroke ; while Glamorgan, which belonged to the 
earl of Warwick, could not be expected to provide fighting 
material to do battle against its lord. Pembroke county, 
of course, was represented by its earl, Lord Herbert. With 
him were John Wogan, son and heir of Sir Henry Wogan 1 , 
and John Eynon, a warrior who had had experience in 
France under the duke of York. Kidwely sent another 
old French warrior in the person of Henry Dwnn, son 
of Owen Dwnn; also Henry Dwnn of Picton, Meredith ap 
Gwilym, and Hoskyn Hervey, a companion in arms with 
Griffith Dwnn in France 2 . 

Brecknock was represented by the Havards — William, 
Lewis, and Thomas ; by the Morgans — William, Walter, 
Walter (another) , and Henry : Gwent by Thomas Huntley, 
another of York's retinue in France ; Thomas ap Harry, 
one of Lord Herbert's retinue ; and Thomas Lewis of 
Chepstow. The Herberts and the Vaughans, whose many 
ramifications had now spread throughout South Wales, 
were represented by Sir Richard Herbert ; another Richard 
Herbert, probably of Ewyas, the ancestor of the second 
line of Herberts, a natural son of Lord Herbert ; another 
William Herbert 3 , a half-brother of Lord Herbert ; John 
ap William, by whom is meant presumably Lord Herbert's 
brother John ; Thomas ap Roger Vaughan, the son of 
Herbert's mother Gwladys by her first husband Roger 
Vaughan ; and William ap Norman, another of the earl's 
relatives. The last three are said to have fought in the 
French wars 4 . 

1 William of Worcester, Itinerarium, 118. Sir Henry Ogan chevalier 
fuit in Francia, de Pembrokeshyre, et maritavit filiam William Thomas, 
chevalier; qui Sir John Ogan, chevalier, obiit apud Banbery felde. 

2 Ibid. Griffith Dwnn habuit 3 filios in Francia: Robertus Dwnn 
non maritavit; Henricus Don in Francia maritavit filiam Sir Roger 
Vaughan, chevalier, et mortuus (est) apud Banbery felde; tercius filius 
minor Johannes Don, qui maritavit filiam domini de Hastynges, cham- 
berlayn regis. 

8 William of Worcester, Itinerarium ; fuit occisus Bristolliae in eras 
tino Sancti Jacobi. This may be an error for the Thomas Herbert slain 
there according to Warkworth, 7. 

4 William of Worcester, who also mentions a Thomas Glys. 



viii] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 177 

Hall, the chronicler, therefore, was not far from the 
literal truth when he stated that Herbert came " with 
the extremity of all his power." He adds that the earl 
" was not a little joyous of the king's summons, partly 
to deserve the king's liberality which of a mean gentleman 
had promoted him to the estate of an earl 1 ." 

The earls of Pembroke and Devon came into touch 
with their enemv somewhere in the neigh- 

A preliminary •> ° 

skirmish, bourhood of Northampton. On Monday, July 

23, the earl of Pembroke's brother, Richard 
Herbert, and the earl of Devon, with a strong force of 
cavalry went on in advance to reconnoitre. They un- 
expectedly collided with the northerners, and a sharp 
fight ensued in which a number of Welsh gentlemen were 
slain, notably Thomas ap Roger, son of Roger Vaughan 
of Bredwardine, Herefordshire. In consequence of this 
shock the whole force was compelled to retire 2 , and fell 
back upon the main body, which had taken up its quarters 
at Banbury 3 . 

Meanwhile the northerners must have come into touch 
with the citizens of Northampton, and perhaps even with 
the earl of Warwick, who could not have been far distant. 
The earl, as we have seen, had announced his intention 
of being at Canterbury on July 16, his daughter having 
been married to Clarence five days before at Calais ; and 
he was certainly on the scene the day after the battle. 

1 Hall, 273-4. 

2 Guto'r Glyn, in Ceinion Llenyddiaith Gymreig, i. 193. 

Dyw Hun y bu waed a lladd. 
" On Monday there was blood and carnage.' 
Ieuan Deulwyn, Bangor Welsh MSS. Society. 

Dyw llun rwi'n deall as 

Yno yternwyd yn tyrnas. 
"On Monday, I understand, our nation was repulsed." 
Guto'r Glyn is our authority for the death of this Thomas ap Roger 
on the Monday. 

Dyw Mawrth gwae ni am Domas; 

Dyw Llun, gyda'i frawd, y lias. 
" On Tuesday we mourn for Thomas, on Monday he was slain while 
fighting at his brother's side." 

3 Hall, 273. Warkworth, 7. 

E. W. R. 12 



178 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

It was probably the assurance that they would receive 
reinforcements from Northampton that emboldened the 
northerners to pursue the royalists, a task which they had 
refrained from attempting after the first day's engagement. 
It is possible, too, that having ascertained Edward's 
whereabouts, they hoped to prevent a junction between 
him and his friends by an immediate attack. At any 
rate, they moved towards Banbury, and took up a strong 
position on the hills around Edgecote Lodge, about five 
miles from that town. 

If the earl of Pembroke expected support from Edward 
„ ' , he was soon to be disillusioned. Most of 

Pembroke 

and Devon the courtiers had fled. Lord Rivers, whose 
influence in that neighbourhood should have 
been sufficient to call forth a strong force, had gone to 
Chepstow ; others had found refuge in Norfolk " with the 
connivance of the king as it is generally said 1 ." To add 
to the difficulties of the royalists Pembroke and Devon 
engaged in an unseemly quarrel about quarters and a comely 
wench. The earl of Devon, it appears, had found lodgings 
before Pembroke's arrival ; but the latter managed to 
oust him. According to Hall's version, who alone narrates 
this incident, Pembroke was the chief offender. A fierce 
altercation ensued. " After many words and cracks " 
the earl of Devon gave rein to his irritation and marched 
away from the battlefield with all his men a distance of 
ten or twelve miles 2 . Whatever may be thought of Pem- 
broke's arrogance and his indecorous gallantries, nothing 
can justify Devon's conduct in allowing a personal insult 
to over-ride his loyalty. Less than two months had elapsed 
since Edward had bestowed an earldom upon this nobleman. 
This defection inflamed the anger of contemporary writers 
in Wales more perhaps than the loss of the battle itself ; 
and many are the envenomed allusions to it. The death 

1 Croyland Continuator, 445—6. Wavrin, 580. 

2 Hearne's Fragment, 24. Hall, 273-4. Warkworth, 7. 



viii] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 179 

of the earl of Devon soon afterwards did something to sweeten 
Guto'r Glyn's cup of bitterness 1 . 

This occurred on July 25, the day before the great 
The weish battle, according to Hall, although it seems 
attack. more probable that it took place on the 24th, 

the day after the first skirmish with the northerners, when 
the two sections of the royalists had once more joined 
hands. However, on July 25 (Wednesday) the earl of 
Pembroke once more offered battle in spite of his ally's 
treachery. He may have hoped to destroy the northern 
army before any reinforcements should reach them from 
Northampton. If he anticipated that they would receive 
such assistance his surmise proved to be accurate. There 
may be some force, too, in the statement of the English 
chronicler that the Welsh, inspired by the prophecies of 
their poets that they would one day vindicate their rights, 
were impetuous and eager for battle, confident of the issue 
" as their unwise prophesiers promised them before." 

"The truth is that in those parts and throughout Wales 
there is a celebrated and famous prophecy 

A prophecy. J 

to the effect that, having expelled the English, 
the remains of the Britons are once more to obtain the 
sovereignty of England, as being the proper citizens thereof. 
This prophecy, which is stated in the chronicles of the 
Britons to have been pronounced by an angel in the time 
of king Cadwalladr, in their credulity receives from them 
universal belief. Accordingly, the present opportunity 
seeming to be propitious, they imagined that now the long- 
wished-for hour had arrived, and used every possible 
exertion to promote its fulfilment. However, by the 
providence of God, it turned out otherwise, and they 

1 Guto'r Glyn, Ceinion Llenyddiaith Gymreig, i. 192, 200. 

Ni aned twyll ond ti, 

Ni bu unbrad ond Banbri. 

Arglwydd difwynswydd Defnsir 

A ffoes; ni chaffas oes hir. 
"There never was deceit or treachery like that of Banbury. The 
earl of Devon fled ; he did not live long afterwards." 



180 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

remain for the present disappointed of the fulfilment of their 
desires 1 ." 

Pembroke had no other alternative than to fight. Like 
a true soldier he did not think the battle lost 

Why 

Pembroke until it had been fought. Devon's force had 

been withdrawn, including the main body 
of archers. The Welsh were now the only loyal troops 
in arms. The king was without an effective following 
and, as events proved, in extreme personal danger from 
the earl of Warwick and his rebels. An inglorious retreat 
might have been as disastrous as the battle itself proved 
to be. In any case, it would justify Edward in impugning 
the loyalty of one upon whom he had lavished unprecedented 
wealth and honour. Pembroke was spurred by duty as 
well as by his innate courage. On July 25, therefore, 
he sent forward his vanguard. Some fighting took place. 
Sir Henry Neville, son of Lord Latimer, was taken prisoner 
and put to death. The advantage was with the Welshmen, 
who succeeded in occupying the hill at Upper Wardington 
before the close of the day 2 . 

On the following morning, Thursday, July 26, the 
„ , , , two armies were in position to renew hostilities. 

The battle of r 

Edgecote, Hall describes the scene of this day's battle 

as " a fair plain near to a town called Hedge- 
cote, three miles from Banbury, wherein there be three 
hills, not in equal distance, nor yet in equal quantity, 
but lying in manner although not fully triangle." Edgecote 
lies about five miles from Banbury, almost in a direct line 
between it and Northampton. The three hills referred 
to are those at Upper Wardington, which we are to under- 

1 Croyland Continuator, 446—7. 

2 Hall, 273-4. Hearne's Fragment, 24. Guto'rGlyn refers, presumably, 
to the death of Sir Henry Neville in the line : 

Marchog a las ddyw Mercher. 
"A knight was slain on Wednesday" (July 25). 
Ieuan Deulwyn also alludes to this fight : 

Ag yn nos Iago nesaf. 
"On the evening of St James's day." 



vni] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 181 

stand as the west hill ; at Culworth, the east hill ; and 
at Thorpe Mandeville, the south hill. From these hills 
there extends a gentle slope towards Edgecote and the 
river Cherwell, a tributary of the Thames. This was the 
" fair plain " or moor, called Danesmoor, which also has 
given its name to the battle. Upper Wardington, on which 
The the Welshmen were encamped on the morning 

battlefield. Q f ^j^ battle, is about three miles from Thorpe 

Mandeville where the northerners had taken up their 
position, and about a mile from Edgecote. The distance 
between Thorpe Mandeville and Edgecote across the moor 
is about two and a half miles, and that between Wardington 
and Culworth, whence Warwick's auxiliaries advanced, 
about three 1 . 

On the morning of July 26 the northerners opened the 
attack with a shower of arrows. The Welsh, 

Richard ' 

Herbert's being deficient in this arm, were compelled 

to abandon their stronghold and descend 
to the plain, where a fierce conflict was waged for several 
hours. " Pembroke behaved himself like a hardy knight 
and expert captain ; but his brother Sir Richard Herbert 
so valiantly acquitted himself that with his poleaxe in his 
hand he twice by fine force passed through the battle of 
his adversaries and returned without mortal wound. When 
the Welsh were on the point of victory John Clapham, 
esquire, servant of the earl of Warwick, mounted the eastern 
hill with only five hundred men and gathered all the rascal 
of Northampton and other villages about, bearing before 
them the standard of the earl of Warwick with the white 
bear, crying, A Warwick ! A Warwick ! 2 " 

1 Ramsay's suggestion (vol. 11. 342, note 4) that the action must 
have taken place within an area of half a mile, or three-quarters of a mile 
at most, in depth, by a quarter of a mile in width, therefore seems wide 
of the mark. There were two actions even on this day, the one between 
Thorpe and Wardington, and the other between Wardington and Culworth. 

2 Hall, 274. Guto'r Glyn states that the action took place on a Thursday : 

Duw a ddug y dydd ddyw Iau. 
"The field was lost on Thursday." 
So, too, Ieuan Deulwyn. There is no reliable authority for the state- 



182 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch 

Some writers have maintained that these reinforcements 
were royal levies who turned traitors. But, apart altogether 
from its' inherent improbability, the assertion is disproved 
by Hall, who is substantiated by William of Worcester 1 . 

Whatever the strength of these auxiliaries it was sufficient 
Death of to num fy the splendid valour of the Welshmen, 

Pembroke and w ho broke, fled, were pursued, slain, and 

his brother. _ . _ 

captured in large numbers. About one hundred 
and sixty-eight Welshmen of note are said to have fallen 2 . 
Pembroke and his brother Richard Herbert were among 
the prisoners, and were taken to Banbury. The next day 
the earl made a codicil to his will (July 27) . On the following 
day both were executed at Northampton by the orders of 
Warwick and Clarence without any opportunity of ransom 3 . 
" Entreaty was made for Sir Richard Herbert both for his 
goodly person which excelled all men there, and also for 
his chivalry on the field of battle. The earl when he should 
lay down his head on the block said to John Conyers and 
Clapham ' Let me die for I am old, but save my brother 
which is young, lusty, and hardy, mete and apt to serve 
the greatest prince in Christendom.' This battle ever 
since has been, and yet is continual grudge between the 
northernmen and the Welsh 4 ." 

Wavrin 's account 5 of the battle appears to agree in 



ment of Oman that Clapham was at the head of the vanguard of the 
royal reinforcements, and treacherously fell upon the flank and rear of 
the Welsh whom he had come to assist. Oman's Warwick. 

1 William of Worcester, Itinerarium, 120-1 ; per exercitum comitis 
Warici. 

2 Ibid. 119. Quam plures alii de valoribus gentibus Walliae ad 
minimum 168 vel circa. He estimates the slain at 1500 ; Warkworth 
at 2000. 

3 Croyland Continuator, 446. 

* Hall, 275. Cf. Polydore, 122. Wavrin, 584, states that the Herberts 
were stoned to death by the people. "Le comte de Warwic commanda 
que on les emmenast morir, et ainsi furent les deux bons chevalliers livrez 
au peuple, qui piteusement les lapiderent." 

6 Wavrin, 581-2. He does not give the name of the stream, but he 
obviously refers to the Cherwell. According to this account Devon 
retreated on the day of battle when he saw that the northerners had been 
reinforced. 



viii] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 183 

the main with that already given. He states that on the 
wavrin-s evening before the day of battle a preliminary 

account. skirmish took place between the combatants 

along the banks of the river Cher well. This was the fight 
already alluded to, as a result of which the Welsh occupied 
the hill at Upper Wardington. They also seized, according 
to Wavrin, the passage over the river, presumably at Edge- 
cote, and compelled the northerners to retire with great 
loss. This was on the following morning. In the afternoon, 
however, the northerners were reinforced to such an extent 
that the Welsh were considerably outnumbered, and had 
to retreat with immense loss. Thomas ap Roger was slain, 
while the two Herberts were taken prisoners. 

Guto'r Glyn also gives an interesting account of the 
Welsh battle. Judging from its wealth of detail 

accounts. an( j ^ s accuraC y on points of chronology, 

it must have been obtained from some of the Welshmen 
who took part on that fateful day. We have already 
quoted largely from him in so far as he is corroborated 
by English authorities. Lewis Glyn Cothi alludes to the 
Welshmen's onslaught when they cut their way through the 
enemy's lines, and is confirmed by the graphic account 
given by Hall. He adds that in the heat of battle " amidst 
the clash of lance and shield and the loud clangour of 
battle, hoarse shouts were heard on every side, some 
shouting ' Herbert,' others ' Our Edward ' ; some ' Warwick,' 
others ' King Harry 1 .' " 

Earl Rivers and his son John were captured at Chepstow 
and, having been brought to Kenilworth, were executed 

1 The above is a free translation of the lines : 
Yno clywid yn unawr 
Griaw maes rhwng gwewyr mawr: 
Rhai Herbert, rhai 'n Edwart ni, 
I aril Warwic, eraill Harri. 

Lewis Glyn Cothi, i. 17. 
The poet ends his poem by calling upon the three sons of Thomas ap 
Roger who, as we have seen, was slain, to take vengeance for their father's 
death, The poet was present at this hero's public funeral. 



184 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

on August 12. The earl of Devon was also taken in Somerset- 
shire and put to death at Kenilworth. King Edward was 
seized not far from that town. 

Of the Welshmen who were either slain at Banbury 
The or subsequently put to death, the following 

slain - names are given by both William of Worcester 

and Warkworth, and they are the only names common 
to the two lists : Lord Herbert and his brother Sir Richard 
Herbert, Thomas ap Roger Vaughan 1 , Henry Dwnn of 
Picton 2 , John Eynon of Pembrokeshire, and William 
Herbert half-brother to Lord Herbert 3 . Of the rest, the 
following are mentioned by William of Worcester : Richard 
Herbert, bastard ; John ap William, a brother of Lord 
Herbert, who had fought in France 4 ; John Wogan, son 
and heir of Henry Wogan ; William Herbert ap Norman ; 
Henry Dwnn of Kidwely ; Thomas ap Harry ; Thomas 
Lewis ; William, Lewis, and Thomas Havard ; William, 
two Walters, and Henry Morgan ; Thomas Glys ; Hoskyn 
Hervey ; Meredith ap Gwilym ; and Thomas Huntley. 
Warkworth adds the following : Sir Roger Vaughan ; 
Henry Wogan son and heir 5 ; Watkin Thomas, son of Roger 
Vaughan 6 ; Ivan ap John of Merwyke ; David ap Jankyn 

1 A charter to Neath abbey by the earl of Warwick, June 24, 1468, 
is witnessed by Sir Roger Vaughan, chancellor, and Thomas ap Roger, 
coroner. Thomas, as we have seen, was slain in battle. Clark, op. cit. 

2 See ante for grants to him in South Wales. 

3 William of Worcester, I finer avium, 119, says that he was slain at 
Bristol on the following day. Warkworth says that it was Thomas Herbert 
that was slain there, and that this William was of Brecknock. Hall says 
that ten others were executed, but does not give their names. 

4 Probably John Gwilym of Ytton. He and Thomas Lewis and 
Thomas ap Morgan were on a commission touching felonies in the lordship 
of Chepstow, May 11, 1467. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 29. 

6 I am inclined to the opinion that Warkworth means the son and 
heir of Henry Wogan, i.e. the John Wogan mentioned by William of 
Worcester. He was the son of Sir Henry Wogan and Margaret, daughter 
of Sir William ap Thomas. 

6 He cannot be the son of Thomas ap Roger, for this Watcyn was 
addressed by Lewis Glyn Cothi (1. vi) together with his two brothers, 
after Banbury. Watcyn, son of Roger Vaughan, was slain in Herefordshire, 
perhaps at Mortimer's Cross. He is not specifically mentioned as having 
been at Banbury by either Glyn Cothi or Guto'r Glyn, though both mention 
Thomas. 



viii] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 185 

of Lymerwyke ; John Dwnn of Kidwely ; Rice ap Morgan 
of Ilston ; Jankyn Perrott of Scottesburght ; John Contour 
of Hereford. Of these it is probable that Sir Roger Vaughan 
did not take part in the battle 1 ; he certainly was not slain 
there, for Lewis Glyn Cothi calls upon him to avenge Banbury, 
and a few years later he was executed by Jasper at Chepstow. 
Nor was John Dwnn of Kidwely slain at Banbury, for he, 
too, played a prominent part later. 

When we contemplate this formidable list of dead, 
comprising the cream of the aristocracy of 
a national South Wales, it is easy to understand why 

the defeat was regarded in Wales as a national 
calamity. It was not a party reverse. Of this there 
is no suggestion. " Let us hasten to the north to avenge 
our country. My nation is destroyed, now that the earl 
is slain " said Guto'r Glyn 2 . " This greatest of battles 
was lost by treachery ; at Banbury dire vengeance fell 
upon Wales " wrote Lewis Glyn Cothi 3 . The defeat con- 
vulsed Wales more profoundly than any other battle in 
which the Welsh had hitherto been engaged, and evoked 
a universal outburst of fierce, passionate, and tearing rage. 

It is not difficult to explain the summary execution 
Warwick's °f William Herbert by the earl of Warwick, 

conduct. ^ a critical period in Herbert's career it was 

Warwick, as we have seen, who supplied the bridge over 
which he passed to the Yorkist fold ; and Herbert had 
become the chief instrument in driving Warwick himself 

1 Lewis Glyn Cothi, i. viii. He is not mentioned by William of 
Worcester. 

2 Awn oil i ddial yn iaith 

Ar ddannedd y nordd uniaith. 



Ef am Has i a'm nassiwn 
Yn awr y lias yr iarll hwn. 

Guto'r Glyn; Cein. Lien. Gymreig, 192-3. 
Y maes grymusa o gred, 
Ac o wall ef a golled. 
Yn Manbri y bu'r dial 
Ar Gymmru deg, a mawr dal. 

Lewis Glyn Cothi, 1. 17. 



1 86 WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY [ch. 

from that very fold. Edward had chosen to entrust to 
this meanest born of his courtiers the confidence which 
the Nevilles regarded as their right by birth, by wealth, 
and by power. Warwick could not forget the part played 
by Herbert in displacing his brother from the chancellorship. 
It was Herbert's informer, too, who had first openly accused 
Warwick of treachery. It was Herbert who had received 
the earldom of Pembroke which had long since become 
the heritage of scions of the royal house. Warwick had 
crossed the Rubicon with the avowed resolve of destroying 
him and his associates ; and having once launched his 
craft on a sea of disloyalty, he had no logical alternative 
but to remove his opponents. We do not thereby justify 
his rebellion. But if the above considerations, and the 
death of Sir Henry Neville, gave Warwick sufficient cause 
for putting the earl of Pembroke to death, for the execution 
of Richard Herbert there was not a shadow of justification. 
This was the brood of malice. 

William Herbert was the ablest of those subtle advisers 
who stood around the royal person and gave the reign 
its most distinctive constitutional feature. Warwick, doubt- 
less, with his glittering phalanx of retainers, dazzled his 
contemporaries ; but the statesmanship of the future was 
to move along the tortuous paths of intrigue, and to depend 
less on the armoury of feudalism than on the intellectual 
equipment of royal favourites. The Tudor monarchy 
had not yet come, but Edward IV and Herbert were its 
harbingers. Herbert had many of the characteristics 
of Tudor ministers, not the least of which were his un- 
popularity and his devotion to the king's service. He 

justified the confidence reposed in him even 
estimate of on military grounds ; for at the moment of 

greatest peril to the Yorkist dynasty he risked 
all while Hastings stood aloof and Lord Rivers took igno- 
minious flight. His unpopularity was that of the parvenu 
who rises to eminence. The eminent churchman who 



viii] WARWICK AND HERBERT— BANBURY 187 

said of another distinguished Welshman of the period, 
Reginald Pecock, that he was instigated by the devil, 
said of Herbert that he was a fierce oppressor of churchmen 
and others for many years 1 . But there appears no evidence 
to substantiate the allegation. His interest in commerce 
coincided with that of Edward and may have inspired it. 
It certainly foreshadowed the basis on which England's 
greatness was to rest. 

It is easy to over-estimate racial characteristics in 
judging character. But there were moments in Herbert's 
career when the fire and impulsiveness of the Celt dominated 
his actions. There is hardly a historic parallel to the 
fateful explosion of passion which took place on the roadside 
inn on the eve of Banbury, and culminated so tragically 
on the morrow. On the other hand, the general tenor of 
his conduct along the perilous and giddy paths by which 
he ascended to power discloses a cool, calculating circum- 
spection. The spite of fortune brought him into conflict 
with the most commanding of medieval barons, and few 
men would have dogged the track of a Warwick with such 
inflexible resolution. The son of a Welsh knight, he forged 
a career which made him the first statesman .of a new era, 
and the most redoubtable antagonist of the last and most 
formidable of the old. 

1 Brief Latin Chronicle, 183. Hie W. Harberde, gravissimus et op- 
pressor et spoliator ecclesiasticorum et aliorum multorum per annos 
multos, hanc tandem, justi Dei judicio pro suis sceleribus et nequiciis 
recepit mercedem. 



CHAPTER IX 

THE RETURN OF JASPER TUDOR— THE COUNCIL 
OF THE PRINCE OF WALES 

A few days after the defeat of the royalists at Edgecote 
Edward himself was taken prisoner at Olney, three miles 
west of Kenilworth, and thence removed successively to 
Coventry, Warwick, and Middleham. That the king should 
thus unceremoniously be paraded over his kingdom at the 
whim of one of his subjects revealed the obliquity of the 
political situation. Comedy succeeded the tragic excesses 
of faction in close proximity. 

For the moment Warwick wielded official patronage 
by right of conquest, and the discomfiture 

Warwick s J ° - 1 

interest of the most favoured among his rivals put 

virtually within his gift a number of advanta- 
geous positions in Wales. Lord Hastings recovered his 
former office of chamberlain of North Wales. He was 
made also constable of Beaumaris 1 . Severe as had been 
the strain upon his loyalty, the earl of Warwick in the moment 
of triumph displayed no vindictiveness. The events of 
the last few years, nevertheless, must have taught him 
that South Wales was a vast field of combustible material 
which he should have under his personal control, and his 
interest in the lordship of Glamorgan gave him a plausible 
excuse for seizing certain offices. He became justiciar 
and chamberlain of South Wales, constable of Cardigan 
and Carmarthen, steward of the two counties, and seneschal 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 165; August 12, 1469. 



ch. ix] WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR 189 

of Cantref Mawr, the forest of Glyn Cothi, and of the Welsh 
courts 1 , offices which had been vacated by the death of 
Lord Herbert. 

Edward's incongruous position soon came to an end. 
He returned to London in October free from the tutelage 
of his proud subject, and immediately commenced operations 
with his usual vigour in a crisis. Eighteen months of strange 
flux and reflux of fortune followed. He sent the following 
order to Lord Hastings within a few days of his arrival 
in the capital : 

" We charge you that ye make proclamations on our 
behalf in all necessary places in the shires of Anglesey, 
Carnarvon, and Merioneth, that they obey the laws and 
pay their duties of the country ther yerely growing as hath 
been of old time due and accustomed, certifying us the 
names of those who were disobedient ; and inasmuch as 
we are informed that Sir Henry Bolde, sheriff of Anglesey, 
payeth not his duties belonging to his ofhce of sheriff we 
charge you to put another in his place in that office unless 
he pays, until ye have other commands from us 2 ." 

On November 7 Edward made his brother Richard 
Lord Ferrers °hi e f justice of North Wales 3 . In South Wales 
of chartiey. Yie re ij e( j largely upon Lord Ferrers of Chartley. 
This man had not figured conspicuously for some time, 
having been completely overshadowed by Lord Herbert. 
But he had served on a number of commissions ; in October 
Edward gave him a commission of array in the border 
counties, and a few weeks later the constableship and 
stewardship of Brecknock, Hay, and Huntingdon during 
the minority of the duke of Buckingham 4 , and power to 
seize the lands of rebels in the border counties. Lord 
Herbert's widow, a sister of Lord Ferrers, received the 

1 Ibid. August 17, 1469. Rymer, xi. 647. 

2 Welsh MSS. Brit. Museum ; part 1. 1900, 26-7. Edward Owen. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 179. In the previous year he had received the 
wardship of the lands of Sir Roger Corbet. Ibid. 

* Ibid. October-November, 1469. 



igo WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR [ch. 

custody of her late husband's lands during her son's 
minority 1 . 

The most consistent Yorkists in West Wales were the 
Revolts in Dwnns. In November John Dwnn was ap- 

west waies. pointed constable of Haverfordwest, and steward 
of Llanstephan and Cilgerran castles. The Lancastrian 
malcontents in this remote district chafed at the ominous 
rise of the family into favour, and the kindred of Griffith 
ap Nicholas under the leadership of his two grandsons, 
Morgan ap Thomas and Henry ap Thomas, seized Carmarthen 
and Cardigan castles and held them against royal authority 2 . 
Richard, duke of Gloucester, was called upon to deal with 
the danger, and we may presume that his intervention 
reached its mark. We cannot say whether the outbreak 
was incited by Warwick and Clarence, but in February 
the constableship of Cardigan was taken away from Warwick 
and given to the steady Yorkist Sir Roger Vaughan, while 
the duke of Gloucester now became chamberlain and 
steward of Cantref Mawr and the other estates of the duchy 
of Lancaster in those parts 3 . Further to strengthen his 
hands in Wales Edward gave John Dwnn, Ferrers, John 
Herbert, and the young earl of Pembroke power to array 
men for service, and Robert Griffith similar power in Shrop- 
shire. Even Lewis Glyn Cothi urges Sir Roger Vaughan 
and his son Watkin to stir their kindred on behalf of Edward 
and to avenge Banbury 4 . 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 175, 204. Margaret, the wife of Sir Richard Herbert, 
was given custody of her son. She afterwards married John Herle. Lord 
Herbert, in a codicil which he added to his will on July 27, had given 
charge of his son, then nine years of age, to his brother Thomas Herbert, 
with a present of "two gilt pots that came last from London, and his 
great courser." Collins, Peerage, HI. 113; Warkworth, 44; see also his 
will. John Herbert was one of his executors. 

2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 175, 180, 181. Hist. MSS. Commission Report, 
I. 407. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls, December to February, 1469. 

4 Dwnn married a daughter of Hastings. For the prominence of 
Dwnn in court functions see Record of " Bluemantle Pursuivant," in English 
Historical Literature of the Fifteenth Century, Kingsford. Young Pembroke 
was knighted in 1466. In 1470 he was invested with a number of his 



ix] WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR 191 

Meanwhile there had become apparent symptoms of 
John impending trouble in various parts of the 

Dwnn. kingdom. The most serious outbreak took 

place in Lincolnshire early in March, under the leadership 
of Sir Robert Welles, one of Warwick's henchmen. The 
rebels were scattered in an engagement afterwards known 
as Losecoat Field. Next day (March 13) " the king, nothing 
mistrusting the duke (Clarence) and the earl, sent from 
Stamford toward them John Dwnn, one of the squires 
of his body, with two letters in his own hand, telling them 
to come to him and disband their levies. John Dwnn 
found them at Coventry. The duke and the earl told 
him that they would come to the king with a thousand 
or at most fifteen hundred men. Dwnn, noticing that 
they were not going in the direction of the king, told them 
of it 1 ." In fact they took the road to Burton to gather 
troops. Edward thereupon proclaimed them traitors. 

They fled to France, where the cynical Louis XI contrived 
Warwick to DI "i n § th em and Queen Margaret into line, 

allies with The queen and Jasper met their new allies at 

Jasper. . 

Amboise and came to an understanding — a sort 
of paradox which, though temporarily successful, produced 
another furious conflagration. The alliance was sealed by 
the betrothal of Margaret's son to Warwick's daughter, 
Anne 2 . In due time Jasper and other Lancastrian leaders 
prepared to launch their craft on an unfathomable sea 
of uncertainties, piloted by their erstwhile enemy. They 
landed at Dartmouth on September 13 and proclaimed 
Henry king. Edward was taken unawares and, being 
deserted by his northern followers, narrowly escaped capture 
by crossing the sea. Warwick marched leisurely to London 
and restored Henry VI. For this reason, and for no other, 

father's offices. Ferrers was made sheriff of Carnarvon and master-forester 
of Snowdon in 1470. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. Wethamstede, n. 103. 
Rymer, xi. 656. Lewis Glyn Cothi, 1. viii. 

1 Rebellion in Lincolnshire, Camden Miscellany, 1. 10-12, No. 39. 

8 Warkworth, 12. Polydore Vergil, 13 1-2. 



IQ2 WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR [ch. 

can the earl of Warwick be called the king-maker. For, 
as we have seen, he cannot justly claim to have placed 
„._.., Edward IV on the throne. When Edward 

The title of 

"King. was proclaimed king, Warwick was virtually 

a fugitive seeking shelter beneath his standard. 
To attribute the victory of Towton to Warwick is to discount 
unjustifiably the generalship of Edward who was admittedly 
the better soldier. And with regard to this second en- 
thronement of Henry, it was so fleeting that a title based 
upon it becomes a grotesque caricature. 

The government of the kingdom now devolved upon 
jasper in Warwick and Jasper Tudor. The latter, with 

Wales. discerning promptitude, returned to Wales. 

We find him at Monmouth on December 16, writing to his 
devoted follower, John Puleston, appointing him sheriff 
of Flint " for his good services 1 ." On January 23 he was 
commissioned to array South Wales and the Marches. 
On February 14 he took the constableship of Gloucester 2 . 
At Pembroke he found his nephew Henry, earl of Richmond, 
" who was kept in manner like a captive but well and 
honourably educated by Lady Herbert 3 ." The tale runs 
that he took him to London and presented him to Henry 
who foretold that he would heal the breach between the 
factions. This prophecy was of course manufactured after 
the accession of the Tudors. 

In March, 1471, Edward returned, landing at Ravenspur. 

With cool audacity he prevailed upon the 

citizens of York to receive him, not as king, 

but as a loyal subject of Henry VI. He then passed on by 

a circuitous route to London, which he reached on April 11. 

1 The original letter is printed in Arch. Cambrensis, 1. i. 146-7. 

2 Rymer, XI. 680-1. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 233, 236, 252. 

8 Hall, 285-7. Polydore, 134-5. According to a petition of Sir Richard 
Corbet to Henry VII, Corbet brought Richmond to Hereford after the 
death of Lord Herbert at Banbury, and there handed him over to Jasper. 
But Jasper was out of England during that campaign. If it refers to 
1471 the petition is very vague and loose. Owen and Blakeway, Shrews- 
bury, 1. 248. 



ix] WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR 193 

His backsliding brother Clarence had now come over to 
his side. Three days later, on Easter day, Edward and 
Warwick met at Barnet. After a few hours' fight Edward's 
strategy prevailed and the earl was slain. That afternoon 
Edward marched back to London in triumph. He was 
accompanied by the young earl of Pembroke 1 . The victory 
kindled a bright flame of enthusiasm in Wales ; for Guto'r 
Glyn, one of the most representative writers of the period, 
regarded it as an occasion for national rejoicing and the 
death of Warwick as just retribution for the death of 
Herbert 2 . 

Margaret landed at Weymouth on the day of Barnet. 
Her chances of success, now very remote, depended largely 
on her being able to unite her forces with those of Jasper 
Tudor in Wales. The latter had raised Herefordshire 
and had seized the castles of Richard Grey, Lord Powys. 
Edward relied upon Sir Roger Vaughan assisted by Devereux, 
Roger Kynaston, and Richard Corbet, to thwart the efforts of 
Jasper, while he himself, having assembled a great muster at 
Windsor, advanced by long, rapid strides against Margaret 3 . 

News of the crushing blow to her cause at Barnet reached 
the queen soon after her landing. At Cerne abbey she 
took counsel with Somerset and other Lancastrian leaders. 
It is generally assumed that Jasper came from Wales to 
take part in the conference. But contemporary writers 
are silent with regard to any such movement on his 
part, and such an enterprise was practically impossible 
in so short a time ; for only nineteen days intervened 
between Margaret's landing and the battle of Tewkesbury, 

1 Political Songs and Poems, II. 280. 

2 Ode to Roger Kynaston : 

Llyma faes llawen fu ynn 



Ar ddyw Pasc arwydd paham 
I dialedd Duw William. 
"This was a happy victory. On Easter day God avenged William." 
The poem adds that Roger went to meet Edward on his return from 
abroad. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls, March- April. Rymer, XI. 681. 



E. W. R. 



13 



194 WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR [ch. 

which hardly sufficed for the news to reach Jasper in Wales 
and for him to travel to the south of England and again 
return to levy troops. 

Having gathered a considerable army in Somerset, 
Tewkesbury, Wilts, and Dorset, the Lancastrians marched 
May 4,1471. towards Gloucester "trusting to be assisted 
by Welshmen by means of Jasper Tudor who had been 
sent to array them 1 ." But Edward came across their path 
at Tewkesbury, and completely routed them. Margaret 
was taken ; and her son Edward, who seems to have fallen 
into the hands of Sir Richard Croft, was slain. So also 
weish was William Hanmer, probably a member of 

knights. £h at devoted North Wales Lancastrian house 2 . 

But Wales was more conspicuously represented on the 
side of the victors. John Dwnn and Roger Kynaston 
were knighted on the field of battle 3 . 

The hopes of Lancaster once more found refuge in Wales, 
jasper's I n spite of the vicissitudes of a long and bitter 

activity. experience Jasper's faith in the ultimate success 

of his cause remained constant and undimmed. It was his 
lot again to avoid the zone of greatest peril, and with 
prescient wisdom he rescued his party from a third con- 
secutive calamity. He was at Chepstow on his way to join 
the queen when he received news of the fight at Tewkesbury. 
To retrace his steps and spin new webs was therefore the 
better course. Rumours of risings in other parts of the 
country prevented Edward advancing to Wales, though 
spies had kept him well informed about the movements of 
the Welsh Lancastrians 4 . He commissioned Sir Roger 



1 Arrival of King Edward IV, 22-27, Hall, 297. Croyland Continuator. 

2 Paston Letters, m. 8-9. 

3 Kynaston was made sheriff of Merionethshire for life in 1473, a 
former grant to him of that office having been annulled by a grant made 
in the same parliament to the Prince of Wales. He also became constable 
of Harlech. Paston Letters, in. 8-9. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. 

4 Restoration of Edward IV, 27. Polydore, 154-5. Hall, 302-3. As 
we have seen he was commissioned to array South Wales for Edward on 
April 25. See a poem on Roger Vaughan by Huw Cae Llwyd. 



ix] WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR 195 

Vaughan ' ' a man there both strong of people and of friends 
to the intent by some guile or engine suddenly to surprise 
and trap the earl." But Jasper was sufficiently powerful to 
overawe South Wales. He seized Roger Vaughan and put 
him to death at Chepstow. But the bishop of Llandaff, 
who seems to have assisted Jasper, lost the temporalities of 
his see, though on the accession of Henry VII Jasper gave 
ample proofs of reciprocal gratitude in lavish grants to 
the cathedral, which still cherishes his name 1 . 

From Chepstow Jasper retreated to Pembroke. It has 
been said that he was there besieged "with ditch and trench" 
by Morgan ap Thomas, a grandson of Griffith ap Nicholas, 
and a supposed adherent of the House of York ; and that 
Morgan's brother David, a Lancastrian, contrived to gather 
a strong force, securing many of his brother's supporters by 
disseminating a false report that Morgan did not really 
wish to capture Jasper, but only to make a pretence of 
investing him ; and that thus with the assistance of a rude 
rabble armed with hooks, prongs, and glaives, he succeeded 
in rescuing him after a siege of eight days 2 . But it may be 
well to observe that this family had been consistent sup- 
porters of Jasper, and that only in the previous December 
this Morgan ap Thomas had given conspicuous manifesta- 
tions of hostility to Edward's government. Moreover, if 
Jasper could have held his own in East Wales where the 
Herberts and Vaughans were all-powerful, he was not 
likely to find much difficulty in the west. 

Jasper sailed from Tenby to Brittany, taking with him 
his nephew, the earl of Richmond. They found refuge 
with Duke Francis II 3 . The escape of Henry, which proved 

1 Rymer. Proceedings of the Privy Council. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 1471. 
Cardiff Records, iv. 40. Jasper gave the bells to Llandaff cathedral, and 
to numerous churches in Glamorgan : Cardiff, Cowbridge, Aberdare, 
Llantwit, St Fagans, Gelligaer, Llancarvan, etc. 

2 Polydore, 155-6. Hall, 302-3. 

3 Restoration of Edward IV. Warkworth seems to suggest that 
Henry of Richmond had come over from France with Jasper and Warwick. 
Stowe states that Jasper found him at Raglan. See also Polydore, 158-9, 
and note above. 

13—2 



196 WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR [ch. 

to be a far more momentous stroke than Jasper could have 
foreseen, was galling to Edward, who made 

Jasper and " " 

Richmond immediate efforts to get hold of him and his 

in Brittany. . , 

elusive uncle. He sent secret messengers to 
the duke of Brittany, offering lavish rewards for their 
apprehension and delivery ; to which the duke replied 
that he could not honourably surrender them, but promised 
to guard them vigilantly so as to prevent them engaging 
in any movement hostile to Edward's government. Edward 
sent again " promising yearly to reward him with a full 
hand and a well-stuffed purse." A rumour took wing 
that Edward was likely to succeed before the year was 
out : ' ' Men say that the king will have delivery of him 
(Jasper) hastily ; and some say that the king of France will 
see him safe and shall set him at liberty again 1 ." 

During the next few years Edward's friends in Wales 
obtained their rewards 2 . Robert Dwnn was made constable 
of Cardigan. John, earl of Shrewsbury, became chief 
justice of North Wales, with power to suppress rebels. 
The earl of Pembroke entered into most of his father's 
offices " without proof of age 3 ." William Vaughan received 
an annuity from Glasbury and other manors in Brecknock. 
Others who received favours were : Thomas Vaughan, son 
and heir of Sir Roger Vaughan ; David Middleton ; John 
Howel of Montgomery ; William Herbert, son and heir of 
Sir Richard Herbert 4 ; Sir John Dwnn ; Hugh Conway ; Rice 
Griffith ; Richard ap Rhys ; and Lord Ferrers of Chartley. 
The Stanleys were invested with considerable power in 

1 Paston Letters, Sept. 28, 1471, and November 4, 1472, in. 59. Issues, 
11 Edward IV. Hall, 302-3. Polydore, 158-9. 

2 Rot. Pari. 12-13 Edward IV, 46-76, and passim. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 
June-August, 1471. 

3 He shared with the duke of Gloucester the offices of chief justice and 
chamberlain of South Wales. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 275 etc. 

* In July 1471, John Devereux and John Herbert were ordered to 
find out what lands belonged to the late Richard Herbert in Herefordshire. 
They both with Thomas Perot, John Wynne, Thomas Vaughan (son of 
Sir Roger Vaughan), and Thomas Morgan were on various commissions of 
array in Wales and the borders in 1472. 



ix] WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR 197 

North Wales and Anglesey. On August 27, 1471, Lord 
Ferrers and the earl of Pembroke were given authority to 
pardon all rebels except Jasper Tudor, the earl of Exeter, 
John Owen, Hugh Mulle, and Thomas Fitzharry 1 . 

The chief interest of the latter part of the reign of Edward 
The ad- IV in its bearing upon Wales lies in the attempts 

£fThf ratl ° n made to secure a more effective administration 
Marches. f ^g i aw T^g government of Wales was a 

thorny question, and Edward was no doubt conscious of 
the magnitude of the task of initiating reforms. Since 
the time when Earl Warrenne defied Edward I with a 
rusty sword no king had seriously contemplated any radical 
changes in the administration of the Marches. The privy 
council of Henry VI groped along many obscure paths 
before it hit upon the principle of a separate council, 
which adumbrated what proved to be the real solution. But 
though the shaft travelled in the right direction it had not 
sufficient momentum to reach its aim. Years of almost 
incessant warfare had now wrought abiding change. Though 
the traditional privileges of the lord-marcher were not yet 
effete, and alien officials were as narrow and irascible as 
ever, the numbers of the former had ominously declined, 
whereas the opponents of the latter had gathered sufficient 
confidence to render the irritating anti-Welsh laws an 
anachronism. Moreover, Wales had almost become one 
vast lordship-marcher. The broad lands of the duchy of 
Lancaster had fallen to the Yorkist Edward. The rich 
lordship of Glamorgan had met a similar fate. So that the 
king, already lord of the Mortimer estates, stood unassailable 
even as a lord-marcher, his only imposing rival being the 
duke of Buckingham. 

As the chief seat of the Mortimers was Ludlow, that 
town became a sort of capital for Wales and the Marches 
when Edward conceived the happy idea of making it a 
residence for the Prince of Wales, to whom he gave a 

1 Rymer, xi. 719. 



198 WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR [ch. 

separate court. The heir-apparent was created Prince of 
Wales on Tune 26, 1471. He was then nine 

The Council u ~ ri 

of the Prince years of age. In July 1 he received a formal 
grant of the principality of Wales and the 
counties-palatine of Chester and Flint ; and a council was 
assigned to him for the management of his household and 
the general control of his education, the chief members 
of which were the queen, the archbishop of Canterbury, 
the dukes of Clarence and Gloucester, Earl Rivers, Lord 
Hastings, and Thomas Vaughan, the prince's chamberlain. 
Any four of these could form a quorum, and their authority 
was to continue till the prince was fourteen years of age 2 . 

The position of Edward as the most considerable of the 
lords-marcher would naturally invest the council with 
authority over the greater part of Wales. And there was 
plenty of work to do, for the volcanoes of anarchy were 
active. In July it was reported that "the Walyshemen be 
busy ; what they meane I can not seye " ; while in the 
following January the king himself intended going to Wales 3 . 

Further general instructions were issued to the council 
in February, 1473. In the spring of the same year its 
activity was directed specifically to the pacification of the 
Marches. This appears to have been its first organised 
effort in the suppression of disorder. The circumstances 
were as follows : 

"On account of the robberies and murders especially in 
the counties of Hereford and Salop as well by men of those 
shires as by men of the Marches of Wales, for which before 

1 July 17, 1471. The council was ordained on July 8. Cal. Pat. 
Rolls, 283. 

* Other members were Robert Stillington, bishop of Bath and Wells, 
the abbot of Westminster, Lord Dacres, Sir John Fogge, Sir John Scotte, 
John Alcock, and Richard Forster. The appointment of Thomas Vaughan 
as chamberlain to the prince "who is so young and tender of age that he 
cannot guide himself" is noted again in January, 1474. In July of that 
year record is made of a house built by him at great cost within Westminster 
abbey for him and the prince. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 414, 455. Grants of 
Edward V, vm. For other ordinances see Halliwell, Letters of the Kings 
of England, I. 

* Paston Letters, in. 11. 



ix] WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR 199 

there was no penalty or remedy, the king sent his queen 
and the prince with many lords spiritual and temporal, and 
judges, as commissioners to inquire and determine these 
defaults ; and furthermore for the reformation of the same 
within the said shires." The lords put their commission 
into execution at Hereford. Inquiries were made by a 
grand jury of 18 knights and squires in one inquest ; "which 
persons with great difficulty and long tarrying at last 
appeared before the said commissioners, and before taking 
oaths said openly in the presence of the commissioners that 
they dared not tell the truth for dread of murder, and to be 
mischieved in their own houses, considering the great 
number of misdoers and the bearers up of the same." Before 
presenting they demanded a special pledge "of the king's 
good grace and assistance of the lords," and a promise that 
the persons presented should not be lightly delivered without 
due examination. Certain individuals were thereupon 
indicted before William Alyngton, justice of the peace for 
Hereford, and the records were delivered to the king's bench. 
In spite of this, at the sessions held at Ross, in Hereford- 
shire, "on the Thursday before the Feast of All Hallows," 
1473, before Thomas Braynton and John Wynne, justices 
of gaol delivery, a number of miscreants were secretly 
acquitted 1 . 

There is no reason to suppose that the lawlessness here 
Rhys a P referred to had anything to do with the decrepit 

Thomas. cause of Lancaster, or with the machinations of 

the duke of Clarence who was now restive and quarrelsome 2 . 
It was probably nothing more than a local riot. Miles ap 
Harry of Newcourt, the only man of position among the 

1 Rot. Pari. vi. 159-60. Cal. Pat. Rolls, 366. Paston Letters, m. 
83. Their names were Miles ap Harry, Robert ap Rosser, John Vawr, 
Morgan Vaughan, Henry ap Roger, and about eighteen others, mostly 
yeomen and labourers. 

2 Ramsay seems to associate the two. It will be recollected that the 
duke of Clarence, in spite of his previous desertion and subsequent re- 
conciliation with Edward, quarrelled again with his brother, and was put 
to death. 



200 WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR [ch. 

accused, had been an associate of the Herberts in similar 
trouble in 1457. He received a formal pardon in June, 
1473. There was also some trouble in West Wales where 
Rhys ap Thomas, grandson of Griffith ap Nicholas, who 
afterwards figured prominently in the general history of 
the times, took the lead. One of the charges against him on 
this occasion was that he entered into his inheritance without 
licence 1 . These events, if only of local significance, were 
not without anxiety to Edward, for in the Easter of this 
year the prince and his court could not leave Wales 2 . 

In the winter there was further disorder in which the 
Herberts were concerned ; and an order was issued to Lord 
Rivers, Walter Devereux, John Devereux, and Richard 
Croft to array the county of Hereford to suppress them 
"because they did not appear before the king and council 
when summoned, to answer for divers offences committed 
by them in Wales and the Marches, but withdrew to 
Wales and stirred up rebellion 3 ." 

In 1475 we have another illuminating document : 
"Whereas there have been perpetrated great and heinous 
complaints of robberies, murders, manslaughters, ravishing 
of women, burning of houses by the inhabitants of the 
Marches and now of late by errant thieves and rebellious of 
Oswestry hundred and Chirksland ; for redress of same I 
am commanded to assemble the people to punish the 
misdoers, and I entrust Thomas, marquis of Dorset and 
Richard Grey, knight, to do the same. Therefore all men 
in your bailiwick between 60 and 16 should array them- 
selves as soon as possible 4 ." 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 360, 388. 

2 Paston Letters, in. 83, April 2, 1473. 

3 Cal. Pat. Rolls, February, 1474. The rebels were William Herbert, 
John Herbert, and Thomas Herbert, two natural sons; and John and 
Roger, two sons of Roger Vaughan. Paston Letters, in. 107. 

For the Welshmen who took part in Edward's expedition to France 
in 1475 see Rymer, 846. 

4 Letter of Prince Edward to the Shrewsbury bailiffs from Ludlow, 
June 8, 1475. Owen and Blakeway's Shrewsbury, 252. 



ix] WARWICK AND JASPER TUDOR 201 

The king summoned the council of the prince to be at 
Ludlow on March 24, 1476, to discuss with 

Concentration . 

of authority the lords of the Marches, to whom the king 
had sent separately, the best means of restoring 
order, intimating that he would be there after Easter 1 . 
In 1478 he required the earl of Pembroke to exchange that 
earldom for that of Huntingdon, assigning as his reason 
that it was "for the reformation of the wele publique, 
restfull governance, and ministration of justice in South 
Wales ; and for the satisfaction of grete and notable sommes 
of money diewe by the said earl of Huntingdon" to the king 2 . 
The earldom of Pembroke was given to the Prince of Wales. 
With a similar object the king purchased Holt castle from 
Lord Abergavenny. 

These fragmentary details serve to prove how active 
were they who would establish the negation of order. They 
manifest also a sincere desire on the part of Edward to 
evolve order out of chaos. And there seems no doubt that 
he was to some extent successful, for we hear very little of 
riots and disorder during the last few years of his reign. 

1 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 574. 

2 Rot. Pari. 203. Lords Report, Appendix, v. 417, 419. Ramsay, 
11. 431. See also Cal. Pat. Rolls, 566. 

In the ordinances for the prince's council in 1473 a more special charge 
was given to Rivers and John Alcock than in 1471. In November of that 
year Rivers was made the prince's governor and Alcock the president 
of the council. In January. 1476, the prince was made justiciar of Wales; 
and in December he was given power to appoint justices in the principality 
and the Marches. In 1478 the council drew up certain regulations for 
the better government of Shrewsbury. See the Cymmrodor, xn.-xv. 
Welsh MSS., British Museum, Part 1. 1900. 



CHAPTER X 

HENRY, EARL OF RICHMOND, AND THE MARCH 
TO BOSWORTH 

We need not enter into the general history of the reign 
of Richard III, except in so far as that may be necessary to 
explain events in Wales. At the time of his father's death 
Prince Edward was at Ludlow with his uncle Earl Rivers, 
Sir Thomas Vaughan " an aged knight 1 ," and other members 
of his council. They left immediately for London. Richard, 
duke of Gloucester, who was at York, also hurried to the 
capital. At Northampton he met Henry, duke of Bucking- 
ham, "with whom the duke of Gloucester had long confer- 
ence, in so muche that as is commonly believed he even 
then discovered to Henry his intent of usurping the king- 
dom 2 ." Buckingham had lived in obscurity during Edward 
IV's reign although he had married the queen's sister, 
Catherine Woodville. 

The prince's party had reached Stony Stratford when 
Rivers and Vaughan were seized by Gloucester and the 
council of the prince dismissed. The queen, on being 
informed of these proceedings, took sanctuary at West- 
minster. Shortly after reaching London Richard was made 
Protector. He was assisted in his designs by Lord Stanley, 
the son of the man who was guilty of double-dealing at 
Bloreheath. Stanley was justiciar of Chester, and he had 
married Margaret, the countess of Richmond. He was 
thus step-father to Henry Tudor. 

1 Croyland Continuator, 486; miles senilis aetatis. 

2 Polydore, 174. 



ch. x] HENRY TUDOR 203 

But of Richard's accomplices the most favoured was the 
The duke of Buckingham. In his anxiety to carry 

duke of the duke with him Richard sacrificed the 

Buckingham. , ... 

advantages which Edward IV had gained in 
Wales by concentrating authority in royal hands, for he 
made Buckingham chief justice and chamberlain of North and 
South Wales, and constable of all the royal castles in Wales 
and the border counties — Carmarthen, Pembroke, Cardigan, 
Aberystwyth, Tenby, Dynevor, Cilgerran, Llanstephan, Wal- 
wyn's Castle, Haverfordwest, Narberth, Builth, Monmouth, 
Usk, Caerleon, Dinas, Ewyas Lacy, Ludlow, Clifford, 
Radnor, Montgomery, Wigmore, Carnarvon, Conway, Beau- 
maris, Harlech, Denbigh, and Holt ; he had power to 
garrison these forts, to appoint sheriffs and other officials ; 
to take the customs at Tenby and Milford ; and to 
levy troops. He was made steward and seneschal of the 
vast Mortimer estates and of the lands of the duchy of 
Lancaster 1 . 

Certain precautionary measures were taken to secure the 
effective transference of this authority. Thus Richard 
sent the following order to the auditors of Wales : ' ' We 
considering that the due shall sustain great costs in executing 
his authority have granted that he have and retain in his 
own hands such money as he shall receive to our use by reason 
of the said office of chamberlain." The inhabitants of 
Gower were charged to vacate all offices in that seigniory, to 
take the duke of Buckingham as their ruler, and to suffer 
any whom he would appoint to enter into their tasks 
" peasibly without interruption." Hugh Bulkeley, the 
deputy-constable of Conway, was not disposed to acquiesce 
in the new arrangements, and Richard wrote to Hugh's 
father, William, telling him to see that his son gave up 
possession of the castle. A mandate was given to the 
people of Carnarvonshire to assist the duke as their sheriff. 

1 Rymer, xn. 180. Grants of Edward V, 7-10, May 15. Ibid. 13. 



204 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

Somewhat similar measures were taken in Pembroke and 
the Forest of Dean 1 . 

Meanwhile the revolution which Richard and Buckingham 
Richard contemplated was rapidly maturing, and the 

becomes latter summoned troops from Wales. The young 

king was now removed to the Tower and dis- 
appeared. Richard preferred a charge of treason against 
Lord Hastings and summarily put him to death. John 
Morton, bishop of Ely, who might have proved an obstacle, 
was sent to Brecon a prisoner. A few days later the queen 
was prevailed upon to give up her second son, the duke 
of York, who was with her in sanctuary. Buckingham 
received him in Westminster Hall and handed him over to 
Richard, by whom he was placed in the Tower to share his 
brother's fate. Then Shaw preached a notorious sermon in 
St Paul's advocating the claims of Richard to the throne ; 
after which Buckingham held a meeting of the citizens in 
the Guildhall where he made an eloquent appeal to the 
Protector to accept the crown. Richard thereupon became 
king on June 26. About the same time Sir Thomas 
Vaughan was put to death at Pontefract, Lord Rivers 
having suffered a similar fate 2 . 

Buckingham continued to advance in favour. In June 
he was made great chamberlain, and shone conspicuously 
at the coronation festivities. It was he who bore the king's 
train in the procession from the palace to the abbey. In 
July his powers in Wales were confirmed and he became 
constable of England. He accompanied the king in his 
progress westwards immediately after the coronation, but 
at Gloucester he took leave of Richard and retired to Brecon. 
His departure was the beginning of Richard's anxieties 3 . 

1 Grants of Edward V, May. Excerpta Historica, 17. Richard 
Williams was constable of St Briavel in the Forest of Dean. In Pembroke 
the king relied upon Richard Newton, Richard Mynors, Hugh Huntley, 
and the Perot family. 

2 Polydore, 182. A monument was erected to Vaughan in the chapel 
of St Paul's, Westminster Abbey. 

8 Cal. Pat. Rolls, July 15. Hall, 382. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 205 

From that moment Henry Tudor, earl of Richmond, 
H nr becomes the central figure in the opposition to 

ear! of the new king. Buckingham and Morton had 

Richmond. ° ° 

not been long together at Brecon before they 
agreed upon a combined movement to dethrone Richard, 
place Henry on the throne, and marry him to Elizabeth of 
York, daughter of Edward IV. The late king, as we have 
seen, had made repeated attempts to get hold of Henry. 
In 1476 he had sent Dr Styllington and two others to 
Brittany "laden with great substance of gold, and that his 
demand might seem more honest he commanded them to tell 
the duke that he desired earl Henry because he might make 
some match with him in marriage, by affinity, whereof the 
roots of the adverse faction might be utterly pulled up." 
The duke at first refused, but "at the last, wearied with 
prayer and vanquished with price, he delivered the earl to 
the ambassadors, not supposing that he had committed the 
sheep to the wolf, but the son to the father, as one who 
thought that king Edward meant simply to marry with 
Henry, Elizabeth, his eldest daughter." Richmond was 
taken to St Malo whence he was to be shipped to England. 
But at that place Henry was overtaken by fever " through 
agony of mind" which necessitated the postponement of 
the voyage across the channel. Meanwhile it was represented 
to the duke by John Chenlet what was likely to be the fate 
of Henry if he fell into Edward's hands, for Henry VI had 
recently been put to death. In consequence of these 
representations the duke once more yielded and sent Peter 
Landois "who, counterfeiting some business, while that by 
long talk devised of purpose he hindered them of their 
intended voyage, he caused earl Henry, almost dead, to be 
brought politicly into a most sure sanctuary within the 
said town and not long after reduced him again to the duke 1 ." 
Henry and his Lancastrian friends were now joined by 
the Woodvilles whom Richard's tyranny had sent abroad. 

1 Polydore, 164-6; Hall, 322-3; Rymer, xn. 22-24. 



206 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

Soon after his accession, therefore, Richard sent Thomas 
Hutton to Brittany instructing him to propose a conference 
on commercial affairs between England and the duchy and 
"to understand the mind and disposition of the duke anent 
Sir Richard Woodville and his retinue, and to enserche and 
know if there be intended any enterprise out of land upon 
any part of this realm, certifying with all diligence all the 
news and disposition there from time to time 1 ." 

Some weeks elapsed before the duke replied that the 
king of France had made him substantial offers for the 
delivery of Henry and threatening war if he refused ; and 
that alone the duke would not be able to withstand the might 
of France, but would be compelled to deliver Henry unless 
Richard sent him 4000 English archers paid for six months, 
and if necessary 2000 or 3000 more at the duke's expense. 
If Richard agreed to this he would await the fortunes of 
war rather than deliver Henry 2 . Whether the duke was 
sincere in his protestations may be doubted ; for he actually 
authorised his treasurer to lend Henry ten thousand crowns 
of gold to enable him to join Buckingham's enterprise 
against Richard. 

The causes which led Buckingham to desert Richard 
Buckingham's are obscure. It has been said that the king 
conspiracy. j^ re f use d him the Lancastrian half of the 
Bohun estates in the Marches 3 , which had become vested in 
the Crown, the other half being already held by Buckingham 
as heir of Eleanor Bohun and Thomas of Woodstock. But 
Richard had virtually conceded this demand in July. It is 
probable that, being aware of the murder of the two princes 
in the Tower, Buckingham joined a widespread conspiracy 
which had already been set on foot by the Lancastrians and 

1 Letters, etc., Richard III, 1. 22-23. Polydore, 191. 

2 Letters, etc., 39-43 ; 54. 

3 Humphrey Bohun, earl of Hereford, left two daughters, Mary and 
Eleanor. Mary married Henry IV, and so her part of the inheritance 
had become vested in the Crown. Eleanor married Thomas of Woodstock, 
earl of Buckingham, and her portion had descended to Henry, the present 
duke of Buckingham. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 207 

the discontented Woodvilles to place Edward V on the 
throne ; and that plan having fallen through by the death 
of Edward, he entered into Morton's project at Brecon of 
placing Henry of Richmond on the throne. 

It is certain that while Buckingham and Morton were 
maturing their plans in Wales, Queen Elizabeth and Henry's 
mother, Margaret, were plotting in London on the same lines 
through the medium of a learned Welsh physician named 
Lewis. When the queen had fully concurred Margaret 
summoned her friends, raised money, and appointed her 
servant Reginald Bray to be her chief agent in the con- 
spiracy. She sent Hugh Conway to Brittany with a large 
sum of money, telling him to advise Henry "to arrive in 
Wales where he should find aid in readiness." When 
Richard became aware of the conspiracy Buckingham was 
summoned to court but excused himself " alleging infirmity 
of stomach 1 ." On October 15 Richard issued a proclama- 
tion against him. 

Three days later there were simultaneous revolts at 
Exeter, Salisbury, and Brecon. From Brecon the duke 
marched towards the Severn with an army of Welshmen 
"whom he as a sore and hard-dealing man had brought to 
the field against their wills and without any lust to fight for 
him, rather by rigorous commandment than for money 2 ." 
Buckingham's movements were made known to Richard 
who contrived that armed men should be set around him. 
In Wales the king relied upon Thomas, son of Sir Roger 
Vaughan, and his kinsmen. They were to hang on his rear 
if he should endeavour to advance from Brecon across the 
border, while Humphrey Stafford was to watch the passes 
over the Wye and the Severn. Buckingham managed to 

1 Polydore, 195-8. Croyland, 491-2. For Hugh Conway see ante. 
He was treasurer at Calais under Henry VII. He was previously keeper 
of the wardrobe, and in i486 commissioner of mines. Letters of Richard 
III, etc. 1. 231; Campbell, 1. 26, 317. Rot. Pari. 250, 361. Reginald 
Bray was afterwards knighted. Rot. Pari. 342. 

2 Polydore, 199. Croyland. Rot. Pari. vi. 245. 



208 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

reach Weobley, the home of Lord Ferrers 1 , where he had 
to remain for ten days on account of the floods, which 
carried away bridges, and otherwise made it impossible for 
him to cross into England. Gradually this enforced 
inactivity demoralised his army which, having lingered idly 
and without money, victuals, or wages, suddenly departed. 
Morton made good his escape to Brittany. Buckingham 
fled in disguise to Shrewsbury, and was sheltered for some 
time by Ralph Bannister. Being discovered he was brought 
to Richard at Salisbury by John Mytton, sheriff of Shrop- 
shire, and executed in the market-place there 2 . 

It appears that Buckingham had shown favour to the 
The Vaughans and might reasonably have counted 

vaughans. upon their assistance. But no sooner was he 

well out of reach than they attacked Brecon and robbed 
the place. 

"Before my Lord of Buckingham departed out of Weobley 
Brecon was robbed, and the young ladies and gentlemen 
were brought to Sir Thomas Vaughan's place, the traitor 
who was the captain of the said robbing, with Roger Vaughan 
of Talgarth his brother, and Watkin Vaughan his brother, 
and John Vaughan ; having been rewarded by my lord 
every one of them, and the least of them had £10 of fee of 
my lord with other diverse gentlemen which some been 
alive and some dead 3 ." 

The Vaughans then went in pursuit of the duke and Sir 
William Knyvett, a gentleman whom Richard had made 
steward of Castle Rising 4 . After the duke had been taken 
they searched for Lord Stafford and Sir William Knyvett, 
both of whom were in the keeping of Elizabeth Delabeare 
and William ap Symon. His friends had shaved Lord Staf- 
ford's head, dressed him in a maiden's raiment, and conveyed 
him to Newchurch. They fetched him and Knyvett again 

1 Croyland, 491-2. Ferrers does not seem to have participated. 

2 Hall. Rymer, xn. 240. Owen and Blakeway's Shrewsbury, 236-7. 

3 Document in Owen and Blakeway, 241. 
* Grants of Edward V, I. 18. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 209 

to Kynnardsley and kept them there until David Llywelyn 
Morgan 1 came and placed Delabeare under arrest. But 
Elizabeth and William ap Symon stealthily conveyed the 
fugitives to Adeley where they remained four days. Then 
there came a great army out of Wales, but eventually 
Stafford and his companion escaped to Hereford, " Stafford 
riding behind William ap Symon aside upon a pillow like a 
gentlewoman rode in gentlewoman's apparel 2 ." 

It is necessary here to remove a slight misapprehension. 
Sir Roger Vaughan of Tretower, the father of Thomas 
Vaughan, was slain not, as has been supposed, at Edgecote, 
but at Chepstow by Jasper Tudor in 1471. The assist- 
ance given by this family to Richard is the subject of an 
ode by Lewis Glyn Cothi, where it is stated that Vaughan, 
having given valiant support to Edward, would help Richard 
to keep the Rose 3 . The attitude he took up was not 
unnatural in view of the circumstances in which he was now 
placed. The extraordinary authority with which Richard 
had vested Buckingham in Wales was a serious menace to 
the smaller gentry, and particularly to the Vaughans, not 
only in Brecknock but also in Gower, where Thomas Vaughan 
was lord of Oxwich 4 . Men like William Herbert and Jasper 
Tudor could appeal to a strong national sentiment ; Buck- 
ingham had no such qualification. Moreover, throughout 
the reign of Edward IV the Vaughans and the Herberts had 

1 This Morgan was afterwards made constable of Hay. Welsh MSS., 
Brit. Museum. 

2 Stafford MSS. n. 24. The three brothers Vaughan were pardoned 
by Henry VII. Campbell, Materials, etc. 1. 408. 

3 Lewis Glyn Cothi, 1. xv : 

Cryv oedd ar gadoedd, deunaw gwart gadarn, 

Gyda'r brenin Edwart; 

A chwedi ev o awch dart, 

I gadw rhos gyda Rhisiart. 
The editor misinterprets the poem on account of his failure to dis- 
tinguish between this Vaughan and the Thomas Vaughan executed at 
Pontefract. 

4 Glamorgan Charters, v. 1713. Gower was part of the confiscated 
estates of Phillip Mansel, which had been given to Sir Roger Vaughan. 
Polydore Vergil, as we have seen, suggests that Buckingham had been 
oppressive. 

E. W. R. 14 



210 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

been Yorkist, and to this was attributable the predominance 
they now enjoyed. Buckingham's sympathies, on the other 
hand, had been Lancastrian, and his sudden rise could not 
have been welcome to the earl of Huntingdon (William 
Herbert). Huntingdon was actually justiciar of South 
Wales when the position was given to Buckingham. After 
the latter's death the office was again given to him as well 
as the stewardship of Usk, Caerleon, Ewyas-Lacy, and 
other Mortimer-Lancastrian estates in South-east Wales 1 . 

Thomas Vaughan became steward of Brecknock, while 
Roger Vaughan received Penkelly in Brecknock and Brynllys 
in Radnor 2 . In West Wales, Rhys ap Thomas received an 
annuity of forty marks, while Richard Williams became 
constable of Pembroke, Tenby, Cilgerran, Haverfordwest, 
and Manorbier. 

Apart from the above grant, which was not given to him 
immediately after the rebellion, there is no authority for 

1 Welsh MSS., British Museum, 350 seq. Cal. Pat. Rolls. 

2 The following were also rewarded by Richard : John Huddleston, 
offices in Monmouthshire ; Thomas ap Morgan, ^40 ; Philip ap Rhys, 
parcel of Knighton ; Morris ap Rhys, portreeve of Presteign ; John Edwards, 
constable of Usk. Annuities varying from forty marks to ^100, receivable 
from the lordship of Usk were granted to Sir Thomas Bowles, John ap 
Jankyn, William Lewis, Morgan Gamage, William Herbert of Raglan, 
Robert ap Jankyn, Phillip ap Morgan, Philip Kemys of Shirehampton, 
Morgan Rhydderch, Edward ap Jankyn, John Morgan, Philip Kemys 
of Caerwent, and Morris Lewis. Annuities from Abergavenny to John 
Vaughan, John Thomas, Rice Llywelyn ap Morgan, and David Philip. 
Annuities from Monmouth to Hopkyn ap Howel, Philip Herbert, William 
Herbert esquire of the body, John Hewes, and William Serjeaunt. Others 
in South Wales were Walter Endreby of Kidwely, William Kemys of 
Newport, and Walter Wynston of Ewyas. 

The following found favour in North Wales : Richard Vaughan 
received Aber in Carnarvonshire and Kernes in Anglesey, David Vaughan 
several offices in those two counties, Hugh Lloyd offices in Carnarvon 
and Merionethshire, William Hanmer the wardship of Robert Puleston, 
Thomas Tunstall constable of Conway, Sir Richard Huddleston constable 
of Beaumaris, Sir Roger Kynaston constable of Harlech and sheriff of 
Merionethshire with payment for sixty soldiers at Harlech, Thomas 
Salesbury constable of Denbigh with twelve soldiers, Lord Powys an 
annuity of £100, Sir William Stanley chamberlain of Cheshire and constable 
of Carnarvon, William Griffith an annuity. William Griffith was one of 
the ushers of the chamber. Edward IV had given him the fee farm of 
Monmouth. Ievan ap Tudor ap Owen received protection. 

Welsh MSS., British Museum. Cf. Gairdner, Richard III, appendix, 
342. Rot. Pari. 22 Edward IV, 203, for grant to Herbert. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 211 

Gairdner's statement that Rhys ap Thomas gave active 
. J « assistance to Richard. It is true that the 

Attitude of 

Rhys a P ' " Life " of Rhys in the Cambrian Register sug- 

gests that he was won over through the medium 
of the countess of Richmond's physician, Lewis, but there 
is so much deliberate fabrication in that document that it 
would be dangerous to place any reliance whatever upon it 1 . 

Meanwhile the earl of Richmond had set sail from 
Henry's Brittany with a fleet of fifteen vessels. For 

adventures. SO me reason he had been delayed ; and when 
at last he took to sea his ships were scattered by a violent 
tempest which drove some of them back on the French coast 
and others on to the coast of Cornwall and Devon. Henry, 
however, succeeded in coming to anchor off Poole or Plymouth 
about the time that Richard had reached Exeter (November 
12th). Henry "seeing the shore beset with soldiers which 
king Richard had everywhere disposed, commanded that no 
man should land before the residue of his ships should come 
together. While he tarried he sent out a boat to see whether 
they were his friends who were arrayed on land. They 
were informed that they were sent from the duke of Bucking- 
ham to be ready to accompany Henry safe unto the camp. 
But Henry, suspecting it to be a trap, as it was indeed, 
hoisted sail and returned to Normandy. Thence he returned 
on foot to Brittany, having received permission to pass 
through Normandy from the king of France, and also money 
to bear his charges 2 ." 

When he reached Brittany he received intelligence that 
the duke of Buckingham had been beheaded, and that a 
large number of English refugees were at Vannes, in Brit- 
tany. At Rennes during the Christmas of 1483 he was 
joined by his friends, who proclaimed him king, he promising 
to marry Elizabeth of York. He received further promises 

1 Richard III, 133. Gairdner quotes the introductory sketch to the 
Works of Lewis Glyn Cothi. But the editor, as has been pointed out, 
relied on the Cambrian Register. 

2 Polydore, 201-3. Croyland, 495. 

14 — 2 



212 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

of help from the duke of Brittany, and prepared for another 
invasion. 

Parliament met in January, 1484. Henry and Jasper 
were attainted, while Henry's mother, the countess of 
Richmond, was declared incapable of holding or inheriting 
any estate or dignity. Her husband, Lord Stanley, had 
proved loyal to Richard thus far. It was anticipated that 
another attempt would be made by Henry in March, and 
the king became increasingly anxious for his expulsion from 
the confines of Brittany. He offered the duke the revenues 
of the English estates of Henry and the refugees if he kept 
them in ward. At last, in June, 1484, Peter Landois, on 
behalf of the duke, negotiated a truce favourable to Richard 1 . 
But Henry, through the sleepless vigilance of John Morton, 
became aware of it and decided to cross into France. Jasper 
and a few friends immediately entered Anjou. Henry, 
"two days after departing from Vannes, and accompanied 
by only five servants, feigned to go unto a friend who had 
a manor not far off, and, because a huge multitude of 
English people were left in the town, nobody suspected his 
voyage ; but when he had journeyed almost five miles he 
withdrew hastily out of the highway into the next wood, 
and putting on a serving-man's apparel, he as a servant 
followed his own servant (who was his guide in that journey), 
as though he had been his master and rode on with so great 
celerity, keeping yet no certain way, that he made no stay 
anywhere, except it were to bate his horses, before he had 
gotten himself to his company within the bounds of Anjou 2 ." 
The company then proceeded to Angers and thence to 
Paris, passing the winter as the guests of Charles VII of 
France. 

Richard's anxious suspicions were intensified when Lord 
Stanley wished to excuse himself from court, a request 

1 Rymer, xn. 226. 

2 Polydore, 206—8. Richard had endeavoured to get the mediation 
of Austria between him and Brittany with regard to Henry. Letters oj 
Richard III, II. 4. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 213 

which Richard granted only on condition that he left his 
son Lord Strange behind as a hostage 1 . In June, 1485, he 
issued a proclamation against Henry, in which it was stated 
that Jasper, John earl of Oxford, Sir Edward Woodville, 
and others had fled from Brittany because the duke would 
not agree to their plans ; that they had taken refuge in 
France ; had chosen as their leader Henry Tudor who, in 
return for the assistance he was to receive, was prepared to 
relinquish the claim of the kings of England to the title of 
king of France. It is to be observed that this proclamation, 
though it asserts that both Owen Tudor and Henry's 
mother were of illegitimate descent, does not impute any 
illegality to the marriage of Owen Tudor and Catherine, the 
widow of Henry V 2 . 

Richard's activity was not confined to proclamations. 
There seems to have been current a prophecy 

Kicnard s 

preparations that Richmond would land at Milford. There 
is a small village of that name in Hampshire, 
and Richard may have been deceived into believing that 
that was the place intended, for Lord Lovel was sent with 
the fleet to the Solent. More probably the object of this 
move was to keep an eye on Henry's preparations at the 
mouth of the Seine on the opposite coast. At any rate, 
Richard did not lose sight of the magnificent natural harbour 
of Milford Haven in Pembrokeshire as a possible landing- 
place. For "he commanded noblemen and gentlemen dwell- 
ing about the seacoast, and chiefly the Welshmen, to keep 
watch by course after their country's manner, to the intent 
that his adversaries should not have ready recovery of the 
shore and come a land ; for the inhabitants about the 
seacoasts place, in the time of war especially, on the hills 
adjoining, lamps fastened upon frames of timber, and when 
any great or notable matter happeneth, by reason of the 
approach of enemies, they suddenly light the lamps, and 

1 Croyland, 501 ; Stow, 467 ; Polydore, 214. 
* Paston Letters, in. 316. Ellis, Letters, I. 162, 



214 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

with shouts through town and field give notice thereof ; 
from thence others afterwards receive and utter unto their 
neighbours notice after the same sort. Thus is the fame 
thereof carried speedily to all villages and towns, and both 
country and town arm themselves against the enemy 1 ." 

In West Wales Richard took very minute precautions 
Richard which he might reasonably have expected would 

wiiiiams. have made it invulnerable. In Pembrokeshire 

he placed his trust in Richard Williams, whom, as we 
have seen, he had made constable of the important castles 
of Pembroke, Tenby, Manorbier, Haverfordwest, and of 
Cilgerran, the gate to Cardiganshire. Elaborate prepara- 
tions were made to put Pembroke castle in a state of defence. 
The woods around Narberth were cut down to supply it 
with fuel. The chamberlain of Carmarthen, Richard Mynors, 
paid Richard Newton £113. 14s. 6d. for the expenses which 
he had incurred in strengthening the castle ; and Henry 
Wogan, the treasurer of Pembroke, by an order in council, 
was requested to provide it with war material 2 . 

Richard also relied upon William Herbert, earl of 
Huntingdon, whose official position in South Wales as 
justiciar gave him considerable power in the royal counties 
of Carmarthen and Cardigan. By another grant he became 
possessed of the castles of the late duke of Buckingham, 
which gave him a startling pre-eminence in Brecknock. 
Sir James Tyrell controlled the upper valley of the Towy 
from Builth and Llandovery, as well as the lordship of 
Glamorgan, for though Tyrell had been ordered to Guisnes 
the levies of the lordship were to take their instructions 
from him 3 . The Vaughans (Thomas, Walter, William, and 

1 Polydore, 213-14. 

2 For this he was paid /ioo and 20 marks. Richard Owen was receiver 
of Kidwely. Richard Williams was to hold Manorbier and Penally by 
knight's service. Another recipient of favours was Howel ap John of 
Llanllwch in Carmarthenshire. A Hugh ap John was denizened. Richard 
also gave grants for the rebuilding of churches at Llandovery and Hirwaun 
in Carmarthenshire. Welsh MSS., British Museum. 

3 Welsh MSS., British Museum. Roger Bikley was constable of 
Llandovery. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 215 

Richard) were induced by various grants to continue in their 
loyalty and secure the valleys of the Wye and the Usk. 

It will thus be seen how little, if any, foundation there is 
for the statement that the chief authority in South Wales 
was divided between Rhys ap Thomas and Walter Herbert 
in so far as that authority could be based on official status 1 . 
Neither had any official position of consequence. Walter 
Herbert may have represented his kinsman, the earl of 
Huntingdon ; but Rhys ap Thomas had no such connection. 
The Tudor chroniclers wrote of him in the knowledge of 
the strong support he undoubtedly gave Henry at Bosworth. 
The influence of Rhys was based on the predominance of 
his family ; and whatever forces he gathered during his 
journey through Wales was a tribute to his own personal 
ascendancy and to the strength of national sentiment. 

In North Wales Richard's supposed friends were the 
chamberlain William Griffith, Huddleston constable of 
Beaumaris, and Sir William Stanley constable of Carnarvon, 
and lord of Bromfield, Yale, Holt, and Wrexham. The 
garrison at Beaumaris was strengthened ; Denbigh was 
granted 200 marks to repair its walls 2 . 

Meanwhile Henry's preparations were advancing at the 
Henry's mouth of the Seine. From Paris he had moved 

movements. to R oue n. There he heard that Richard intended 
marrying Elizabeth of York, and that the other daughter 
was to be married to an obscure man. "This matter 
pinched Henry by the very stomach, because thereby he 
saw that he could not now expect the marriage of any of 

1 Gairdner takes this view on the authority of Polydore. 

2 The following were Richard's grants in Wales this year: Walter 
Vaughan, steward of Elvel ; William Vaughan, a brother of the Thomas 
Vaughan who had opposed Buckingham, an annuity; so also did Walter, 
the son of that Thomas ap Roger who was slain at Banbury, and Richard 
Vaughan; John ap Morgan of Usk; Robert ap Howel, constable of 
Skenfrith; David Goch of Radnor; Richard and Roger Baker of Breck- 
nock ; Sir Richard Croft was told to repair Radnor and Elvel castles ; 
Nicholas Spicer, receiver of South Wales, was to give the burgesses of 
Brecon ^60 towards repairing their town walls : David Vaughan received 
denizenship and the ferm of Caerwys and Conway ferry. Welsh MSS. , 
British Museum. Pat. Rolls. 



216 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

king Edward's daughters, wherefore he thought it was to 
be feared lest his friends should forsake him. Therefore it 
was thought to stand with their profit if by affinity they could 
draw into surety of that war Walter Herbert, a man of 
ancient authority among the Welshmen, who had with him 
a sister marriageable ; and to procure the same, messengers 
were sent to Henry earl of Northumberland, who had in 
marriage Walter's other sister, that he would deal in that 
cause ; but the ways were so beset that none of them could 
come to him 1 ." 

This Walter Herbert was a natural son of Lord Herbert, 
the first earl of Pembroke. There can be no doubt that he 
gave support to Henry, for he was afterwards knighted and 
made steward of Talgarth and Cantrecelly 2 . It will be 
remembered that Lord Herbert, in his will, intended that 
his daughter Maud, now the wife of the earl of Northumber- 
land, should be given in marriage to Henry. Henry was of 
course well acquainted with the family under whose care he 
had been for some time before his departure for Brittany. 

The marriage proposal does not seem to have reached 
Walter Herbert. However, a messenger came to Henry 
from Morgan of Kidwely, a lawyer, who informed him that 
Rhys ap Thomas and Sir John Savage were wholly devoted 
to his cause ; that Reginald Bray had gathered no small 
sum of money for his service ; and that he should therefore 
set out for Wales at the earliest opportunity 3 . 

This Morgan belonged to a Tredegar family. Llywelyn 
sir John a P Morgan of Tredegar had two grandsons, who 

Morgan. were cousins, Evan Morgan and Jankyn ap 

Philip. Evan Morgan had a son Sir John Morgan of Tredegar 
who, as we have seen, had already received small grants in 
the lordship of Usk. He was one of the receivers of petitions 
in the first parliament of Henry VII by whom he was 

1 Polydore, 215. 

2 Campbell's Materials, etc. 1. 108 ; 11. 443. Rot. Pari. vi. 379. 

3 Polydore, 215-16. Croyland. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 217 

knighted, made steward of Machen, sheriff of Gwenllwg 
and Newport, and constable of Newport "with the making 
of all particular offices in those lordships during the minority 
of Edward duke of Buckingham 1 ." He brought Henry 
military assistance soon after the landing at Milford. 

Jankyn ap Philip had a son Morgan ap Jankyn ap 
Morgan of Philip of Langston who was on a few com- 

Kidweiy. missions with the Herberts under Edward IV. 

He was pardoned by that king in 1475 for some unknown 
offence 2 . He had two sons : Trahaiarn Morgan, "skilled and 
qualified in the laws of England 3 "; and John Morgan, 
who afterwards became bishop of St David's. Polydore 
appears to confuse these two brothers when he states that 
it was John Morgan, a lawyer, who negotiated with Henry. 
The lawyer was Trahaiarn. Polydore is similarly in error 
with regard to the Christian name of Rhys ap Thomas, 
whom he calls Richard. Neither Hall nor the author of 
the Life of Rhys ap Thomas falls into the same error. They 
call him Morgan Kidwely and Morgan of Kidwely respec- 
tively. This Trahaiarn had married a co-heiress of Henry 
Dwnn, and had thus become possessed of Motliscwmb, a 
place within a mile or so of Kidwely ; and hence he is called 
Morgan of Kidwely. On the accession of Henry he became 
chancellor of Glamorgan with a fee of £20 a year, while his 
son, Henry Morgan, was in close attendance upon that 
sovereign 4 . 

However, the most active plotter in Henry's favour was 
the brother John Morgan, whom Henry afterwards presented 
to the parish church of Hanslap in the diocese of Lincoln, 

1 Campbell, i. 94, 584. Rot. Pari. 336-384. 2 Cal. Pat. Rolls, 561. 

3 Dwnn. 11. 218; "yn ddysgedig ac yn raddol ynghyfraith Lloegr." 
There is no John Morgan of Kidwely among those who received favours from 
Henry VII. 

Gairdner's Richard III, following Polydore, gives the Christian name of 
Morgan of Kidwely as " John." Ramsay confuses Morgan Kidwely the 
Attorney-General with (Trahaiarn) Morgan of Kidwely, the Welsh lawyer. 

4 Campbell. 1. 77-91, 230, 555, 597. October — December, 1485. 
Cardiff Records. Letters etc. of Richard III, 11. 90. Henry Morgan, 
Sir David Owen, and Hugh Vaughan held household appointments. 



218 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

made dean of St George's chapel Windsor, and of St Mary's 
Leicester, and also clerk of parliament with a fee of £40 a 
year. 

This Morgan of Kidwely has also been confounded with 
Morgan Kidwely the Attorney-General. But that official 
had no connection with Wales, and he is not mentioned by 
any authority. His connections were mainly with Dorset 
and the south of England 1 . 

To resume. Henry, accompanied by Jasper Tudor, 
"John Morton, and the earl of Oxford, set sail 

Henry lands ** 

at Miiford from the mouth of the Seine on August 1st 

with a few ships and a force of about 2000 men, 
whom a French authority describes as the worst rabble 
that one could find 2 . They were under the command of 
Philibert de Shaunde. The weather was very favourable and 
he arrived at Miiford Haven on August 7th, a little before 
sunset. He landed at Dale on the northern shore of the 
entrance to the haven, though Richard was informed that 
the landing took place at Angle on the opposite shore. It 
is possible that a detachment landed at Angle so as to 
advance on Pembroke and Tenby castles. Richard had 
kept a close watch here during the winter 3 . 

On the following morning, at break of day, the invaders 

1 In May 1480 he was on a commission to investigate the concealing from 
the king of lands belonging to the manor of Dorset. In July he was on 
another commission to find out what lands belonged to Henry, duke of 
Somerset, in Herts and to the Earl of Wiltshire in Dorset. He was on 
commissions of array in Wilts and Dorset in 1484. He helped Richard 
against Buckingham, and was rewarded with a grant of certain manors 
in those two counties. In February 1485 he was on a commission in 
Yorkshire. He was attorney-general after the accession of Henry. There 
were others of the family: Geoffrey Kidwely was comptroller of the port 
of Southampton. Maurice Kidwely was another. Grants of Edward V, 
30—1 ; xxxi. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. 

2 Comines Dupont, II. 246. Molinet, II. 406. 

3 Polydore, 216. Hall, 409-10. Bernard Andre, Memorials of 
Henry VII, 24-5. Croyland, 500-1. See also a letter of Richard to 
Henry Vernon on August 11, 1485; Hist. MSS. Commission Reports, 
MSS. of the duke of Rutland, 1. 7. "departyd out of the waters of the 
Seine the first day of this present month and landed at Nangle beside 
Miiford Haven on Sunday last passed, entending our destruction." Sunday 
would be August 7. Soon after the landing Sir David Owen was knighted. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 219 

marched to Haverfordwest and, meeting with no opposition, 
proceeded five miles beyond. The association 
of Richard of the Tudors with Pembroke told immediately 

in their favour ; for Arnold Butler brought 
intelligence that the inhabitants of the town " were ready 
to support Jasper their earl." Richard III found at least 
one loyal Welshman in these parts in the person of Richard 
Williams, the constable of Pembroke. It is noteworthy that 
here alone during his march to Bosworth, at least until he 
reached Shrewsbury, Henry met with any opposition, though 
it was suppressed without difficulty 1 . Williams had no 
force at his command which could resist an army of 2000. 
He himself probably hastened to Nottingham where the 
king received news of the landing. This fact has never 
been fully appreciated, that though Nottingham is nearly 
200 miles distant from Milford, Richard was informed of 
Henry's coming within four days of the actual event, surely 
a tribute to the loyalty and expeditious movements of 
Williams. He fought with Richard at Bosworth and was 
attainted in the next reign 2 . 

Henry was still in the neighbourhood of Haverfordwest 
when he was informed that Rhys ap Thomas and Sir John 
Savage were hostile to him ; and on the following day 
(August 9th), when he had entered Cardigan, a similar 
rumour reached him that Rhys ap Thomas and Sir Walter 
Herbert were at Carmarthen prepared to challenge his 
progress. These rumours caused him some anxiety. "He 
resolved to go against them, and when he had either put 
them to flight or received them into his obedience, to make 
haste against king Richard." 

He sent forward a body of cavalry, but they soon 
returned with the information that no danger was to be 
apprehended from Carmarthen. On the contrary, Richard 

1 It is significant, too, that in the list of those \vho were rewarded 
by Henry VII there appears to be only one Pembrokeshire man. The 
Arnold Butler of the text was of Dunraven in Glamorgan. 

2 Rot. Pari. 



220 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

Griffith, " a man of high parentage," joined him with rein- 
forcements from that very town. He is said 

The attitude J 

of Rhys ap to have "revolted" to Henry, from which we 
are to infer, presumably, that the troops there 
with Rhys ap Thomas and Herbert were supposed to be loyal 
to Richard. Sir John Morgan also came in with a few 
followers. Was it with, or without, the connivance of 
Rhys ap Thomas and Herbert that these two men joined 
Henry ? Polydore leaves the impression that it was without 
their connivance ; and that Henry, when he left Cardigan 
for Shrewsbury, was uncertain of the allegiance of Rhys 
and Herbert. 

On the other hand, there can be no doubt that Rhys 
intended ultimately to attach himself to Henry. The family 
had always supported the Tudors and the House of Lancaster. 
His father and uncle had fought at Mortimer's Cross. Rhys 
himself and his brothers had collided with Edward IV ; 
and on one occasion Richard, then duke of Gloucester, had 
been called upon to suppress them. Richard III had given 
him a small annuity but no official status, though his family 
prestige in West Wales was such that he would at once have 
become the leader of any important enterprise among the 
Welsh of those parts 1 . 

It is instructive to note, moreover, that Polydore couples 

Rhys ap Thomas with Sir John Savage. The 

and the latter was a son of Lord Stanley's sister, and 

drew a stipend from Holt castle, the property 

of the Stanleys ; and the Stanleys were deeply implicated 

in Henry's enterprise 2 . We may, therefore, fairly suspect 

1 One of the inaccuracies of his "Life" in the Cambrian Register is 
to make him at this period constable of Carmarthen castle. That office 
was held by Sir John Dwnn who was also sheriff of the two counties. We 
hear nothing of Dwnn during these great events. He was probably 
away, as he was an officer at Calais and deputy of Risbank. He retained 
his positions under Henry VII. Rot. Pari. 341. Letters of Richard III, 
etc. I. 15. 

2 Polydore, 216 seq. Cal. Pat. Rolls. "Ballad of the Lady Bessy." 
When Lord Strange unsuccessfully tried to escape from court he confessed 
that his father was implicated and threw himself on the king's mercy. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 221 

that Rhys ap Thomas and Sir John Savage were agents in 
a common intrigue, and the suspicion is confirmed by the 
" Ballad of the Lady Bessy." The plot was deep and dark. 
It seems to have been arranged that when news of Henry's 
landing would be passing through Carmarthen on its way 
to Richard's headquarters at Nottingham, it would be 
noised abroad that Rhys ap Thomas and his confederates 
would oppose Henry, in order that Richard might be lulled 
into a sense of false security, as indeed he was ; for though 
he heard the news on the nth he did not move till the 
15th. Further to disarm suspicion they joined Henry at 
intervals, Rhys two days before he reached Shrewsbury, 
Sir John Savage between Shrewsbury and Bosworth, and 
Stanley on the battle-field. 

Henry had already sent messengers to inform the 
Stanleys, the Talbots, and his friends in North Wales, that 
he was making for Shrewsbury along the valley of the Severn. 
His letter to his kinsman John ap Meredith 1 has been 
preserved, and is as follows : 

"By the King. 
"Right trusty and well-beloved, we greet you well. And 
whereas it is so that, through the help of Almighty God, 
the assistance of our loving and true subjects, and the great 
confidence that we have to the nobles and commons of this 
our principality of Wales, we be entered into the same, 
purposing, by the help above rehearsed, in all haste possible 
to descend into our realm of England, not only for the 
adoption of the crown, unto us of right appertaining, but 
also for the oppression of the tryant, Richard late duke of 
Gloucester, usurper of our said right ; and moreover to 
reduce as well our said realm of England into its ancient 
estate, honour, and property and prosperity, as this our 
said principality of Wales and the people of the same to 
their erst liberties, delivering them of such miserable 
servitude as they have piteously long stood in : We desire 

1 Wynne's History of the Gwydir Family, 55-56. 



222 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

and pray you, and upon your allegiance strictly charge and 
command you that, immediately upon the sight hereof, 
with all such power as ye may make, defensibly arrayed 
for the war, ye address you towards us, wheresoever we shall 
be, to our aid, for the effect above rehearsed, wherein ye 
shall cause us in time to come to be your singular good lord ; 
and that ye fail not hereof as ye will avoid our grievous 
displeasure, and answer it unto your peril. Given under 
our signet at our ( ). 

"To our trusty and well-beloved John ap Meredith ap 
Ievan ap Meredith 1 ." 

From Cardigan Henry proceeded northwards "through 
Henry's ru gg e d an d indirect tracts." His natural line 

march. f m arch would be through Strata Florida, 

Aberystwyth, Machynlleth, and thence to Newtown and 
Welshpool in the upper valley of the Severn ; but, local 
tradition apart, there is no data which will enable us to 
describe his itinerary between Cardigan and Shrewsbury. 
But he knew enough of the temper and history of the people 
among whom he had landed to realise that his descent from 
Cadwaladr and the kings of old would win him support ; 
and that the display of a fiery red dragon would fire enthu- 
siasm 2 . This standard was offered at St Paul's after the 
victory. He was also conscious of the influence of the 
poets, and had utilised them to prepare the people for his 
reception. One of these was Robin Ddu 3 , to whose 
writings we have already referred in connection with 
Owen Tudor. 

During his progress through Cardiganshire he was joined 

1 It will be observed that the date and place are left blank. I do 
not find John ap Meredith's name among those who were rewarded by- 
Henry, which is curious if he assisted him. 

8 Hall, 410. Bernard Andre, 9. Croyland, 501. 

3 Y mae hiraeth am Harri, 

Y mae gobaith i'n hiaith ni. 
"We look forward to the coming of Henry; our nation puts its trust in 
him." Robin Ddu, in Ceinion Llenyddiaith, 221. 

See also the unpublished poems of Bedo Brwynllys (Cardiff MSS.), 
and other contemporary poets. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 223 

by a few local squires who were afterwards rewarded 1 . 
On reaching the confines of Merionethshire he probably 
received a North Wales contingent, several of whom were 
signalled out for distinction after Bosworth "for true and 
faithful service done as well in this our late victorious field 
as otherwise 2 ." The tale runs that at Machynlleth he was 
sheltered by Davydd Llwyd, the poet, who was uncertain 
whether to prophesy failure or success, until his wife 
solved the difficulty by saying that he could lose nothing 
by predicting success ; for if it proved true he might be 
rewarded, and if it proved false Henry would not live to 
reproach him. The tale is one of many fables of a later 
day, and is discredited by the fact that the Tudors had 
found no more stalwart supporter than Davydd Llwyd. 

When Henry was a two days' journey from Shrewsbury 
Rh s he came to an understanding with Rhys ap 

j° ins Thomas, whom he promised the lieutenantship 

of Wales in return for his support. Rhys had 
now an effective argument for a bargain in an imposing 
array of followers, "a great bande of soldiers 3 ." It was 
now about August 12 or 13, and Henry might be in the 
neighbourhood of Newtown or Welshpool. Rhys had 
traversed Mid- Wales with the black raven as his standard 4 . 
Among the Carmarthenshire people who were rewarded by 
Henry after his accession were Adam ap Evan ap Jankyn 

1 The chief of these were Rhys ap Philip, who became rhaglaw of 
the county; Owen Lloyd, who was made constable of Cardigan, where 
he was followed by Rhydderch ap Rhys next year ; David Glyn ; Phillip 
ap Rhys ap Thomas Vaughan of Mabwynion, who became steward of that 
district and bailiff of Isaeron. Rot. Pari. vi. 363. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. 

2 The following came from North Wales : Edward ap Ednyfed, who 
received the woodwardship of Merioneth ; Howel ap Griffith ap Howel 
who received the fee-farm of Penmaenllwyd ; Richard Pole, who became 
sheriff of that county; Rheinallt Davy, who got an annuity of 100/- from 
Pennal; Robert Gethin of Snowdon; Edward Morgan of Aberffraw; 
William Eynon ; William Griffith ap Robin, and Rhys ap Llywelyn, who 
became sheriff of Carnarvon and Anglesey respectively, and both of whom 
received denizenship early in i486. Also Piers Stanley and Piers Egerton. 
Campbell, 295, etc., Rot. Pari. 353, seq. ; Rymer xn. 89 ; Cal. Pat. Rolls, 
passim. 

3 Polydore, 217. 4 "Ballad of the Lady Bessy." 



224 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

"in consideration of his true service unto our noble progen- 
itors of long tyme passed, and to us nowe late in our victorious 
journey and field, to his great costs and damages" ; and 
Philip ap Howel and his wife "sometime our nurse," an 
interesting fact of Henry's childhood 1 . 

Of the assistance rendered by Rhys ap Thomas there is 
ample evidence besides what is contained in the Patent 
Rolls. There is striking testimony, for example, in the 
English ballads of Tudor times, allowance being made of 
course for exaggeration. The " Ballad of the Lady Bessy " 
alludes to him thus : 

Sir Rhys ap Thomas, a knight of Wales certain, 
Eight thousand spears brought he ; 



Sir Rhys ap Thomas shall break the array, 
For he will fight and never flee 2 . 

Again, the " Rose of England " : 

Then Sir Rice ap Thomas drawes Wales with him, 

A worthy sight it was to see 

How the Welshmen rose wholly with him, 

And stogged them to Shrewsbury e 3 . 

1 The Carmarthenshire grants are as follows : John ap Thomas, who 
became steward of the Welsh courts of Carmarthenshire and Cardiganshire ; 
Morris Lloyd of Wydegada, for service in our late triumph ; Owen ap 
Griffith, who was made steward and constable of Laugharne ; Geoffrey 
Rede, receiver of Kidwely with an annuity of ^20, and with Rhys ap 
Thomas and Morris ap Owen supervisor in the duchy of Lancaster ; Adam 
ap Evan ap Jankyn, attorney in the two counties; his brother David, 
rhingyll of Kidwely and Carnwallon, escheator in South Wales, and the 
amobrship of Iscennin ; Richard Owen, receiver of Kidwely ; Morris ap 
Owen, a similar office in Carnwallon and Iscennin, for his services ; Hugh 
Vaughan forester in Kidwely lordship ; John Aubrey, rhaglaw in Carmar- 
thenshire for his services at Bosworth; Walter ap Lewis, bailiff and 
attorney in Kidwely and the district; Philip ap Howel and his wife an 
annuity of £10 "for true service done unto us." Rot. Pari. vi. 350. Cal. 
Pat. Rolls, passim; September — December, 1485. Campbell, passim. 

2 Early English Poetry, xx. (1847). 

8 Child's Popular Ballads, ill. 331—3. The Lady Bessy also tells 
Lord Stanley : 

Your brother dwelleth in Holt castle 



All the Welshmen love him well; 
He may make a great company. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 225 

Moreover, Rhys himself was generously rewarded — the first 
of the family to receive conspicuous favour from the English 
Government since the time of his grandfather, Griffith ap 
Nicholas, in the reign of Henry VI. Amongst other marks 
of favour Rhys was knighted on Bosworth field, and was 
made constable, steward, and lieutenant of Brecknock, 
steward of Builth, and chamberlain of Cardigan and Car- 
marthen counties 1 . 

It is probable that Sir Walter Herbert joined Henry at 
the same time as Rhys, and brought with him the levies of 
south-east Wales, notably of Monmouth and the surrounding 
districts 2 . 

When Henry reached Shrewsbury, about August 15th, 
Henry at ne found the gates shut and the portcullis let 

Shrewsbury. down ; and so he fell back to Forton for the 
night. The town subsequently surrendered and gave him 
a contingent of men at its own cost. Henry was now 
joined by those to whom he had sent messages soon after 
his landing. From Shrewsbury he marched to Newport 
where he encamped for the night. That evening he was 
joined by Gilbert Talbot and a few hundred Shropshire men. 
Thence he proceeded to Stafford where he had an interview 
with Sir William Stanley. Stanley's men were drawn largely 
from North Wales and the valley of the Dee. From Stafford 
Henry moved to Lichfield. 

Richard heard now for the first time that his rival had 
traversed Wales unopposed. It threw him into a fierce 

1 Campbell, i. 105-9; 11. 91. He was also a commissioner of mines. 

2 Evan Lloyd Vaughan, constable of Neath and Aberavon, for service 
etc. Hugh ap Howel, ^20 out of the fee-farm of Monmouth for service 
at Bosworth "where it happened him to be sore hurt and maimed"; 
John ap Howel, steward and receiver of Monmouth ; Walter ap David 
ap John, coroner of Gower; William Llywelyn of Newport and Thomas 
ap Morgan ; Hugh Richard of Cantrecelly ; Nicolas Williams of Monmouth ; 
Mathew Cradock, constable of Caerphilly; William Herbert, receiver of 
Monmouth, Whitecastle, Skenfrith ; others in Glamorgan and Aber- 
gavenny. The affairs of the earldom of March were to be managed by 
nine commissioners including Jasper, Morgan John Philip, and Thomas 
Morgan of Gloucester. Cal. Pat. Rolls, passim. Campbell, 253, 298. 
Jasper became lord of Glamorgan. 

E. W. R. 15 



226 HENRY TUDOR [ch. 

rage, for he had believed "that his men whom he had disposed 
for defense of that province wer ready in all respectes." 
He had been informed that Henry had such a small company 
that he " should surely have an evell ende whan he showld 
come to that place, where either he should be forced to fight 
against his will, or taken alive by Walter Herbert and 
Rhys ap Thomas 1 ." He immediately set out for Leicester. 

Meanwhile a strange chance happened to Henry. Being 
still in doubt as to the disposition of Lord Stanley he 
lingered, accompanied by only twenty armed followers, in the 
rear of his army, deliberating what he should do ; for he 
now knew that Richard was at hand. In the neighbourhood 
of Tamworth he lost all trace of his army at nightfall and 
had to pass the night in deadly fear in a village, perhaps 
Whittington, three miles away from them. The army was 
equally anxious about Henry until he returned to them 
early next morning, excusing himself that he had been 
consulting some of his friends in secret. He then had a 
private interview with the two Stanleys at Atherstone, and 
a little before evening on the same day Sir John Savage 
came over to his side 2 . 

From Leicester Richard advanced to Bosworth where he 
pitched his tent for the night. A terrible dream disturbed 
his rest, "for he thought in his sleep that he saw horrible 
images as it were of evil spirits haunting evidently about 
him, as it were before his eyes, and that they would not let 
him rest ; which vision truly did not so much strike into his 
breast a sudden fear as replenish the same with heavy 
cares 3 ." 

On the morning of August 22nd he drew up his men 
with John, duke of Norfolk, on the left, the earl of Northum- 
berland on the right, and himself in the centre. Henry, 
having rested his men during the night, also drew his men 

1 We have already shown that Richard had no real grounds for this 
reliance on Rhys ap Thomas at least. 
* Polydore. Hall. Croyland. 
3 Polydore, 222. 



x] HENRY TUDOR 227 

out for battle. The earl of Oxford was chief captain of 
the army. Gilbert Talbot commanded the 

Bosworth. , ^ txt t 

right, Sir John Savage the left, and Henry the 
centre " trusting to the aid of Lord Stanley, with one troop of 
horsemen, and a few footmen." Lord Stanley was mid- way 
between the two hosts ; and when Henry asked him to 
arrange his men for battle he sent an evasive answer that 
he would join him "with his army well appointed," and that 
Henry should "set his own folks in order 1 ." 

Richard's troops attacked with great shouts and a flight 
of arrows. The battle was raging when the king was 
informed of Henry's vulnerable position. Giving spurs to 
his horse he issued from the flank and made for Henry's 
standard. But Henry and his men withstood him manfully 
until William Stanley came to their assistance. In the 
thick of the fight Richard was slain. Norfolk and Lord 
Ferrers (Walter Devereux) were slain. A few took sanctuary, 
but the greater part threw down their arms. The earl of 
Northumberland was received into favour. 

Henry was crowned on the battle-field. In the evening 
he came to Leicester. Thither also was brought Richard's 
body ' ' naked of all clothing, and layd upon an horse back 
with the arms and legs hanging down on both sides," and 
buried at the Franciscan abbey. 

Rhys ap Thomas was knighted on the battle-field, and 
gave considerable assistance to Henry in subsequent years. 
Jasper Tudor became duke of Bedford, and married the 
widow of the late duke of Buckingham 2 . The later history 

1 Bernard Andre, 29. Polydore, 222-6. 

2 The following Welshmen found favour with Henry in the first year 
of his reign in addition to those already mentioned : Morris ap David 
ap Griffith of Knighton ; David ap Madoc Gough of Ceri and Cedewain ; 
William Lloyd, constable of Denbigh; John Thomas, constable of Hay; 
Hugh Lloyd, escheator of Denbigh ; John ap Evan ap Llywelyn of Radnor ; 
Thomas Havard of Caerleon ; Hugh Lewis of Denbigh ; David Middleton, 
escheator of Denbigh; John ap Meredith ap Ieuan Lloyd of Denbigh; 
David Lloyd, one of the keepers of the Tower of London ; David Owen, 
chief carver of the king. Rot. Pari., 344-66. Campbell, 208-30. 
Robert ap Gwilym ap Thomas of Hereford, Walter ap Gwilym of Archen- 
field, and the Vaughans who opposed Buckingham, were pardoned. 

15—2 



228 



HENRY TUDOR 



[CH. 



of Jasper and Rhys is beyond the pale of the present work. 
The new king inaugurated an era of internal peace, so that 
Lewis Glyn Cothi a few years later was able to say with 
truth, "The boar is cold in his grave; the world is still, 
and envenomed feuds asleep." 

A'r baedd oer i'r bedd a aeth 
A'r egwyd a'i rywogaeth. 
A'r byd es enyd y sydd 
A'i holl wenwyn yn llonydd. 



THE HERBERTS. 
Gwilym ap Jankyn 



David Gam 



h- 



Roger 

Vaughan 

of 

Bredwardine 



Thomas 
I 

I 



1 

Howel 



Jankyn 

i 



Gwladys m. Sir William 1 
| ap Thomas 



Evan 



Thomas of 
Raglan 



Jankyn of 
Llantwit 



1 

John 



i 1 — i 

Thomas Elizabeth Margaret 
Herbert m. m. 

(died Sir Henry Sir Henry 
at Stradling Wogan 

Troye) 



William 2 

Herbert 

earl 

of 

Pembroke 



i 

Sir 

Richard 

Herbert 

of 

Colebrook 



John William 
Herbert Herbert 
(John ap 
William) 



1 




_i 


_. i 






1 


I 


i 
I 


_i 




Richard 


Sir 


William 


Sir 


Sir 


Herbert 


William 


Herbert 


Walter 


Richard 


of 


Herbert 


earl of 


Herbert 


Herbert 


Ewyas 

1 


of 
Troye 


Pembroke 




of 
Montgomery 


William 










Herbert 










earl of 










Pembroke 










(new 










creation) 










ohn Wogar 


i 
l Thomas Wogan 


i 
Henry Wogan 


i 
dau. m 



David ap 
Jankyn 

I 

Thomas 

ap 

David 

I 

John 

ap 

Thomas 



John Wogan 
Sir John Wogan 



dau. m. Sir William Perot 

I 
Sir Owen Perot 

Thomas Perot 



1 Cal. Inquis. post mortem, 47 : Elizabetha quae fuit uxor Gulielmi app Thoma 
armigeri, — nulla tenuit in com. Hereford nee march. 

2 He had other sons : George, John, Philip, Thomas, William, Richard. 



x] 



HENRY TUDOR 



229 



THE MANSELS. 



Richard m. Lucy, dau. 
Mansel of Philip 

of Scurlage 

Isabel, dau. m. Sir Hugh Mansel 
of John of 
Penrice 



Sir Richard Mansel m. dau. of 
Gilbert 
Turberville 
of 

Penlline | 

John Mansel m. Cecily 



William Beauchamp 
earl of Warwick 



Isabel m. Sir Roger 
Umfraville 

of 
Penmarch 



Cecily m. Sir William 
Cantelupe 

of 
Cantleston 



dau. of m. Philip (1420 — 1471) m. dau. of 

Griffith I Mansel Sir Philip 

ap Long 

Nicholas 

Jenkyn Mansel 



FAMILY OF GRIFFITH AP NICHOLAS. 



Mabli, dau. 
of Meredith 

ap 
Henry Dwnn 

Gwenllian m. 



Nicholas m. dau. of Griffith ap 

Llywelyn of Newton 
Griffith 

ap m. dau. of Sir 

Nicholas Thomas Perot 



Griffith 

ap David 

ap Thomas 



Thomas 

ap 
Griffith 



Owen 

ap 
Griffith 



Morgan David Henry Jankyn 



Sir Rhys 

ap 
Thomas 



Thomas ap 
Griffith 



1 1 

Rhys ap David 

Griffith m I 

Nicholas 



230 



HENRY TUDOR 



[CH. X 



THE DWNNS. 



i 

Robert 
Dwnn 



Griffith Dwnn 

i , 



Henry 
Dwnn 



Henry Dwnn 

I 
Meredith 
J 



1 

David 



Sir John 
Dwnn 

I 

Sir Edward 

Dwnn 



1 

Owen 

Harri Dwnn of Picton 



Daughter m. Trahaiarn 
ap Morgan 
ap Jankyn 



LIST OF ORIGINAL AUTHORITIES 

Acts and Proceedings of the Privy Council. H. Nicolas. (Record 

Commission, 1834.) 
Ancient and Modern Denbigh. John Williams. Denbigh, 1856. 
Andr6, Bernard. Vita Regis Henrici Seplimi, Memorials of 

Henry VII. J. Gairdner. (Rolls Series, No. 10.) 
Antiquary. Vol. xvi. etc. 
Archaeologia. Vol. xxix. etc. 
Archaeologia Cambrensis. 

Basin, Thomas. Histoire de Charles VII et Louis XI. J. Quicherat. 
(Society de l'Histoire de Paris, 1855.) 

Beaucourt, G. du Fresne de. Histoire de Charles VII. (Paris, 1885.) 
Bekyngton, T. Letters of. G. Williams. (Rolls Series, No. 56.) 
Berry. See Blondel. 
Blakman, J. Liber de vita et miraculis Henrici VI. Printed by 

Hearne (1734). 
Blondel, R. De Reductione Normanniae. J. Stevenson. (Rolls 

Series, No. 32.) 
Brief Latin Chronicle. See Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles. 

Calendars of Gwynedd. Breece. 

Cambrian Register, 1795. Life of Sir Rhys ap Thomas. 

Campbell, Materials for the History of the Reign of Henry VII. 2 vols. 

(Rolls Series.) 
Capgrave, John. De Illustribus Henricis. (Rolls Series, No. 7.) 
Cardiff Records. 
Ceinion Llenyddiaith Gymreig. 
Chartier, Jean. Chronique de Charles VII. (Edit. Vallet de 

Viriville, 1858.) 
Chronicle, Davies. English Chronicle, printed for the Camden 

Society, by Sylvester Davies. No. 64. 
Chronicle, Giles. A Chronicle (Henry IV — Henry VI) printed by 

Dr Giles from MSS. Sloane 1776. and Reg. 13. C. 1. 



232 LIST OF ORIGINAL AUTHORITIES 

Chronicle, London. English Chronicle of London, printed by Sir 

H. Nicolas, 1827. 
Chronicle of the Rebellion in Lincolnshire. J. G. Nichols. (Camden 

Miscellany, vol. 1.) An official account by some one in the 

royal service. 
Chronicles of the White Rose of York. (Bohn, 1845.) A collection 

of documents relating to the reign of Edward IV. 
Clark. Carta et Munimenta Glamor ganiae. Glamorgan Charters. 
Claus Rerum. Record Office, Fetter Lane. 
Collections, Historical and Archaeological, relating to Montgomeryshire. 

Powys-Land Club. 
Comines, Philippe de, Mimoires de; edit. Dupont. (Paris, 1840. 

Societe de l'Histoire de France.) 
Croyland Abbey; Ingulph's Chronicle of, with Continuations; edit. 

Riley. (Bohn, 1854.) 
Cymmrodor. Cymmrodorion Society. 

Davydd Llwyd, Poems by. Cardiff MSS. 

Deputy Keeper of the Public Records, Reports of. 

Devon Issues. Issues of the Exchequer, Henry III — Henry VI, from 

the Pell Records, by F. Devon. (Record Commission, 1837.) 
Doyle, J. E. The Official Baronage of England, 1886. 3 vols. 
Dugdale, Sir William. The Baronage of England. 2 vols. (1675.) 
Dwnn's Heraldic Visitations of Wales. 2 vols. Welsh MSS. Society. 

1846. 

Ellis, Sir Henry. Original Letters Illustrative of English History. 

(Three Series, 1 825-1 846.) 
Escouchy, Mathieu D' ; Chronique de. (Societe de l'Histoire de 

Paris.) 
Excerpta Historica. Sir H. Nicolas. (London, 1831.) 

Fabyan, Robert. The New Chronicle of England. H. Ellis. (181 1.) 
Foedera, Conventiones et Litterae. T. Rymer. (London, 1709.) 
Fortescue, Sir John. The Governance of England. Edit. Plummer. 
(Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1885.) 

Gairdner, James. Life and Reign of Richard III. (London, 1879.) 
Gorchestion Beirdd Cymru. Edit. Rhys Jones. Shrewsbury, 1773. 

Edit. Cynddelw (revised). Carnarvon. 

Grafton, Richard. Chronicle of England. (London, 1809.) 

Grants etc. of Edward V. J. G. Nichols. (Camden Society, No. 60.) 

Gregory, William. Historical Collections of a London Citizen ; 

1 189-1469. J. Gairdner. (Camden Society, New Series, No. 

18.) 

Guto'r Glyn, Poems of. Hafod MSS. Cardiff Library. 



LIST OF ORIGINAL AUTHORITIES 233 

Hall, E. Chronicle containing the History of England from Henry IV 

to Henry VIII. H. Ellis. (London, 1809.) 
Hardyng, John. Metrical Chronicle, with continuation of R. Grafton. 

H. Ellis. (1812.) 
Historical. Literature of the Fifteenth Century. Kingsford. 
Historical MSS. Commission Reports. 
Hislorie of the Arrivall of King Edward IV. J. Bruce. (Camden 

Society, 1838.) 

Holinshed, Raphael. Chronicles of England, etc. H. Ellis. (London, 
1807.) 

Howel Swrdwal. Gwaith Barddonol. Bangor Welsh MSS. Society. 

J. C. Morrice, 1908. 
Huw Cae Llwyd. Poems of. Cardiff MSS. 

Ieuan Deulwyn, Casgliad o Waith. Bangor Welsh MSS. Society. 

Ifor Williams, 1909. 
Inquisitiones post mortem, Calendar of. 
Iolo MSS. 
. Issues. Issue Rolls; Pell Issue Rolls. MSS. Record Office, Fetter 

Lane. 

Letters and Papers Illustrative of the Reigns of Richard III and 

Henry VII. 2 vols. James Gairdner. (Rolls Series, No. 24.) 

—Letters of Margaret of Anjou. C. Munro. (Camden Society, No. 80.) 

Lewis Glyn Cothi. Poetical Works of. 2 vols. (Oxford, 1837.) 
Cymmrodorion Society Publications. 

Liber Niger Scaccarii. T. Hearne. (Oxford, 1728.) 

Life of Sir Rhys ap Thomas. See Cambrian Register. 

Lords' Reports. Reports of the Lords' Committee on Matters apper- 
taining to the Dignity of a Peer. (1829.) 

Medieval Boroughs of Snowdonia. Lewis. University of Wales 
Guild of Graduates. 

Ministers' Accounts. 

Monstrelet, Enguerrand de. Chroniques. Buchon. (Pantheon Lit- 
ter aire, 1836.) 

More, Sir Thomas. Life of Richard III. Lumby. (Pitt Press.) 
Opera Omnia. (London, 1689.) 

Mostyn MSS. History of Wales by Ellis Griffith. 

Paston Letters. J. Gairdner. 3 vols. 1872. 

Patent Rolls, Calendar of. Prepared by the Deputy Keeper of the 

Records. 
Pecock, Reginald. Life of; by John Lewis. (Oxford, Clarendon 

Press, 1820.) 
Plumpton Correspondence. T. Stapleton. (Camden Society, No. 4.) 

!5— 5 



234 LIST OF ORIGINAL AUTHORITIES 

Political Songs and Poems. T. Wright. (Rolls Series, No. 14.) 
Polydore 'Vergil. (Camden Society, No. 29.) 
Popular Ballads, Child. 

Privy Seals. MSS., Record Office. Fetter Lane. 
Queen's Remembrancer's Miscellanea, etc. MSS., Record Office, 
Fetter Lane. 

Receipt Rolls. MSS., Record Office, Fetter Lane. 

Record of Carnarvon. 

Records of Denbigh and its Lordship. Williams. Wrexham, i860. 

Repressor of Over Moche Wijtyng the Clergie. C. Babington. (Rolls 

Series, No. 19.) 
Rotuli Parliamentorum. (Record Commission.) 
Royal Historical Society's Transactions. 191 1. 
Rutland Papers. (Camden Society, No. 21.) 
Rymer. Collections, etc. 

Stafford MSS. See Historical MSS. Commission Reports. 

Statutes of the Realm. (Record Commission, 1810.) 

Stevenson, J. Letters and Papers Illustrative of the Wars of the 
English in France. (Rolls Series, No. 22.) 

Stow, John. Annales or Generall Chronicle of England, with Con- 
tinuation by Howes. (London, 1615.) 

Three Fifteenth Century Chronicles. J. Gairdner. (Camden Society, 

1880.) 
Transactions of the Cymmrodorion Society. 
Trevelyan Papers. (Camden Society.) 
Tudur Penllyn. Cardiff MSS. 

Warkworth, J. Halliwell. (Camden Society, 1839.) 

Wavrin, Jehan de. Recueil des Chroniques, etc. (Rolls Series.) 

Welsh MSS. British Museum. Edward Owen. Cymmrodorion 

Series. 
West Wales Historical Society's Transactions. 
Whethamstede, Johannes. Registrum, etc. Riley. (Rolls Series, 

No. 28.) 
Worcester, William of. Annales Rerum Anglicarum. Printed by 

Stevenson. (Rolls Series.) 

Itinerarium. 1777. Printed by Simeon. 

Wynne. History of the Gwydir Family. Oswestry. 1878. 



INDEX 



Aber, 210 

Aberdare, 195 

Aberfraw, 67 

Abergavenny, 78, 109, no, 201, 210 

Abergele, in 

Aberystwyth, 27, 34, 86, 90, 96, 137, 

151, 203, 222 
Adam ap Evan ap Jankyn, 223-4 
— ap Howel, 98 
Agincourt, Battle of, 17, 20, 37, 43, 

45. 57. 66 
Alcock, John, 198, 201 
Alexander's Town, 172 
Alnwick, 150 
Alun ap Meredith ap Philip Madoc, 

40 
Anabill, 163 
Andrew ap Lewis, 44 
Angle, 218 
Anglesey, 16, 26, 37, 70, 77, 83, 

89, 168, 171, 189, 197, 223 
Archenlield, 136, 146 
Arnold, Morris, 156, 172 
Arras, Congress of, 51, 64 
Aubrey, John, 224 
Audley, Justice, 80 
Audley, Lord, 53, 63, 91, 102, 122, 

123, 137, 152 
— , Nicholas, 102 

Baker, Richard, 215 

— , Roger, 215 
Bala, 16, 37 
Bam borough, 149 
Banbury, 76, 157, 168, 176-192, 215 
Bangor, see of, 153 
Banister, Ralph, 208 
Banon, Thomas, 148 
Barmouth, 154, 165-6 
Barnet, 157, 193 
Barre, Thomas, 63 
Basingwerk, 32 
Bassaleg, 26 
Bayeux, 54, 57-61 



Baynard's Castle, 84, 132 
Beauchamps, The, 77, 79, 89, 101, 

135 
Beaufort, Cardinal, 21, 44, 67 
— , Edmund. See Somerset, duke 

of. 
— , Margaret, 68, 79, 92, 96 
Beauforts, The, 89 
Beaugency, 49 

Beaumaris, 27, 31, 67, 76-7, 116, 
145, 156, 164, 188, 203, 210, 

215 
Beaumont, 50, 69 
Bedford, John, duke of, 21, 46, 64 
Bellingham, Sir Henry, 169 
Bennayth, Richard, 173 
Bennoth, Hugh, 40 
Bikley, Roger, 214 
Blaenllyfni, 155 
Bloreheath, Battle of, 102-4, 123, 

202 
Bohun, Eleanor, 79, 206 
— , Humphrey. See Hereford, earl 

of. 
— , Mary, 79, 206 
Bolde, Bartholomew, 77 

— , Henry, 156, 189 
Bonville, Lord, 79, 163 

— , Cecille, 163 
. Bosworth, Battle of, 7, 23, 92, 215- 

228 
Bourchiers, The, 45, 58, 116, 132, 

159 
Bowles, Sir Thomas, 210 
Bray, Reginald, 207, 216 
Brechva, Ieuan, 74 
Brecon (Brecknock), 44, 79, 97-8, 

101, 114, 117-8, 123, 138, 

147, 175-6, 189, 191, 204-10 
Bredwardine, 177 
Bristol, 30, 75, 98, 130, 138, 146-7, 

176 
Brittany, 20, 49, 63, 150, 154, 170, 

!95. 205-8, 212-3, 2I ° 



236 



INDEX 



Bromfield, 147, 215 
Brown, Thomas, 149 
Brynllys, 210 
Brys, Thomas, 149 
Buckingham, Humphrey, duke of, 
13, 42, 78, 79, 82, 85, 89, 
90, 95, 97, 99, 100, 104, 108, 
no, 113, 117-8 
— , Henry, duke of, 79, 138, 202-9 
— , Edward, — , 217 
Builth, 67, 79, 84, in, 150, 156, 

203, 214 
Bulkeley (Bulkley), Hugh, 203 
— , William, 25, 77, 164, 203 
Burgundy, 51, 63, 161, 165 
— , duke of, 145, 148 
Burley, William, 25 
Bury, Parliament of, 5, 37-42 
Butler, Arnold, 219 

Cade's rebellion, 9, 61, 75-6, 122 

Caerleon, 84, 109, no, 203, 210 

Caerphilly, 100 

Caerwys, 215 

Calais, 61, 75-6, 78, 104, 105, 113, 

123, 173. 177 
Caldecot, 67, 146 
Cambridge conspiracy, 17, 46 
Canons, David, 22 
Cantrecelly, 149, 172, 216 
Cantref Mawr, 189, 190 
Cardiff, 79, 100, 118, 195 
Cardigan, 26-7, 37-8, 44, 86, 89, 

125, 135-137. I49-50, 172, 

188, 190, 196, 203 
Carentan, 57, 59, 75~6 
Carew, Thomas, 44, 45, 64 
Carmarthen, 13, 16, 27, 38, 40, 

44, 86, 89, 91, 96, 100, 124-5, 

135-7, i5 - 2 < 1 75> I ^°» J 8&> 

190, 203 
Carnarvon, 16, 26, 37, 83, 86, 89, 

138, 143, 145, 155, 164, 170, 

172, 189, 202, 203 
Carregcennen, 96 
Castle Martin, 82 
— , Philip, 140, 141 
Catherine, Queen, widow of Henry 

V, 9, 21-2, 66-72, 94, 127, 213 
Cause, Roger, 64 
Caws, 30 

Cedewain, 79, no, 137, 164 
Cemmaes, 67, 102, 123 

— , William, 156 
Ceri, 79, no, 164 
Chamberlain, Sir Roger, 39 
Charltons, The, 25, 104 



Chatillon, 163 

Chenlet, John, 205 

Chepstow, 136, 164, 176, 183, 185, 

194. *95 
Cherbourg, 58, 60, 61 
Cherwell, River, 181, 183 
Cheshire, 76, 90, 101-3, 115, 198 
Chester, 37, 38, 40, 77, 79, 96, 102, 

112, 119, 155, 202 
Chipping Norton, 130 
Chirk, 140, 147, 170, 172, 200 
Chwitford, Thomas, 154 
Cilgerran, 13, 37, 82, 146, 190, 203, 

210 
Cirencester, 121, 175 
Clapham, John, 18 1-2 
Clarence, George, duke of, 105, 
173, 174, 177, 182, 190-3, 
198-9 
Clement, Maud, 24 

— , William, 24 
Cleobury Park, no 
Cleygyn, 172 

Clifford, 79, 138, 150, 158, 203 
Cobham, Eleanor, 38, 40-1 
Coedraeth, 82 
Coleshill, 67 
Contour, John, 185 
Conway, 15, 31, 76-7, 86, 116, 
168-172, 203, 215 
— , Hugh, 196, 207 
Conyers, John, 182 

— , Sir William, 174 
Corbet, Sir Richard, 192, 193 
— , Sir Roger, 103, 116, 189 
Cornwall, Thomas, no, 137, 147 
Cottishold, 175 
Court of the President and Council 

of Wales, 34, 36, 39 
Coventry, 104-5, 108, 111-2, 115-17, 

120-1, 148, 163, 188, 191 
Cowbridge, 195 
Cradock, Mathew, 225 
Crevant, Battle of, 21, 47, 48, 54 
Crickhowel, 155 

Croft, Sir Richard, 108, no, 116, 
122-3, I 37> I 4^» J 94> 200, 
215 
— , Thomas, 148 
Culworth, 181 
Cymmer, 16, 83 
Cymmerch, in 
Cymmorthau, 33 

Dafydd ap Einon ap Rhys Hywel, 

161, 168 
Dale, 13, 218 



INDEX 



237 



Danesmoor, 181 

Dansey, John, 53 

Daventry, 68 

David, Howel, 156 

David ap Ieuan ap Eynon (David 

ap Einon), 140, 144-5, 155, 

166-7 
David ap Einon ap Ieuan, 144 

— ap Griffith, 51 

— ap Gwilym, 156 

— ap Ieuan, 31, 51 

ap Owen, 144 

ap Trahaiarn, 44 

— ap Jankyn, 184 

— ap Madoc Gough, 227 

— ap Meredith, 25 

— ap Rees ap Llywelyn, 109 

— ap Rhys, 63 

— ap Thomas, 21, 31, 40, 195 
ap David ap Llywelyn, 33 

Davy, Hopkin, 124, 128 

— , Howel, 156, 172 

— , Johannes, 51 

— , John, 156, 172 
Deio ap Ieuan Hen, 129 
Delabeare, Elizabeth, 208-9 
Denbigh, 79, 89, 96, 109, 111, 116, 
120-1, 137, 139, 140, 143, 
156, 164, 166, 168, 203, 215 
Derell, John, 63 
Despensers, The, 101, in, 161 
Deulwyn, Ieuan, 3, 4, 50, 62, 74, 

94 
Devereux, Anne, 117 
— , Sir John, 43 
— i —, 193. 196, 200 
— , Sir Walter (Lord Ferrers), 52, 

76, 79-83, 97, 101, 104, 106-8, 

116-123, 132-142, 146-151, 

164, 172, 189, 190, 196-7, 

200, 208, 227 
Devon, earl of, 79, 121, 175-180, 

184 
Dinas, 109, 155, 203 
Doe, Morgan, 25 
Dolgelly, 86 
Donne, Hugh, 58 
Doore, Galfridus, 51 
Dorset, Thomas, marquis of, 200. 

See Somerset. 
Dryslwyn, 27, 151— 2 
Dunois, Count of, 51, 55, 56, 60 
Dunster, 136, 155 
— , Lord. See Huntingdon, earl of. 
Durham, 189 
Dwnn, Geoffrey, 64 
— , Griffith, 20, 51, 53, 176 



Dwnn, Henry, 152, 170, 184, 217, 
(of Picton) 176, 184 
— , John, 95, 102, 123, 136-7, 147, 
151-2, 172, 185, 190-1, 194, 
196, 220 
— , Owen, 25, 40, 64, 76 
— , Robert, 63, 196 
Dwnns, The, 90, 129-30, 136, 139, 

190 
Dyffryn Brian, 82 
Dynevor, 23, 27, 40, 44, 106, 130, 

203 
Dyngestowe, 163 

Edgecote, Battle of, 3, 5, n, 29, 

149, 174, 178, 180-183, 188 
Edward I, 26, 36, 11 1 

— IV, earl of March, 6, 8, 10, 17, 

22, 28, 36, 73-203 

— V, 202, 204 

— , Prince, 74, 100, 110-1, 120, 

144, 164, 194, 200 
— , John, 8, 45, 51 

— ap Ednyfed, 223 

— ap Howel, 64 

— ap Jankyn, 210 

— ap Madoc, 153 

— ap Morgan, 144 
Edwards, John, 210 
Eliot, John, 17 
Elizabeth of York, 205 

Ellis ap Griffith ap Einon, 83 

Elwick, Thomas, 169 

Emlyn, 82, 146 

Enderby, Walter, 210 

Englefield, 67 

Evan Lloyd Vaughan, 225 

— ap Jenkin, 40 

— ap Robin, 33 
Ewyas, 79, 150, 156 

— Lacy, 109, no, 203, 210 
Eynon, John, 40, 184 

— , William, 223 
Eyton, Fulk, 55 

— , John, 139, 176 

— , Nicholas, 103 

— , Roger. 137, 172 
Exeter, Henry Holland, earl of, 
120, 142, 143, 145, 197 

Fastolf, Sir John, 49, 51, 62 
Ferrers of Chartley. See Devereux, 

Walter. 
Ferrybridge, 133 

Fitzhenry (Fitzharry), Thomas, no, 
116, 124, 128, 137, 142, 147, 197 
— , William, 64 



238 



INDEX 



Fitzwalter, Lord, 64, 132 
Fitz warren, William, 31, 197 
Flint, 25, 67, 96, 116, H2, 171, 

192, 198 
Fluellen, 47 

Formigny, 9, 59, 61, 76 
Fortescue, Sir John, 108 
Fougeres, 56, 76 
Francis II, duke of Brittany, 193, 

196 

Gabriell, The, 159 

Gam, David, 18, 44, 45, 52, 53, 

74 
Gamage, Morgan, 210 
— , Thomas, 64 
Gelligaer, 195 
Geoffrey ap Rhys, 64 
Gerardston, 20, 172 
Gethin, Morris, 156, 172 
— , Sir Richard, 46, 47, 49 
— , Rhys, 46 
— , Robert, 223 

Glamorgan, 26, 53, 78, 89, 100-1, 
109-10, 112, 118, 123, 158, 
171, 176, 188, 195, 197 
Glasbury, 138, 196 
Gloucester, 80, 130, 131, 135-6. 
152, 156, 167, 174-5, 192, 
194, 204 
— , Humphrey, duke of, 4, 13, 21, 
23-4, 26, 37, 39, 41, 53. 6 3> 
66, 68, 69, 74 
— , Richard, duke of. See Richard 

III. 
Glover, William, 135 
Glyn, David, 223 
Glyn, John, 45 

Glyn Cothi, Forest of, 128, 157, 189 

Glyn Cothi, Lewis, 3-10, 13, 23, 

28-31, 34, 48, 50, 62, 74, 93-4. 

99, 125, 129, 149. 150, 168, 

183-5, 190-1, 209 

Glyndwr, Owen, 10, 16, 17, 22, 25, 

26, 34, 44, 52, 74 
Glys, Thomas, 176, 184 
Goch, David, 215 
— , John, 156 
Goodrich, 31, 136 
Gough, David, 148 
— , Sir John, 60-61 
— , Mathew, 9, 21, 48-62, 73, 76, 

101, 123 
— , Owen, 48 
Gower, 90, 136, 141, 147, 151, 172, 

175. 203, 209 
Gregory ap Heulyn 64 



Grey of Ruthin, Edmund, Lord, 

77, 104, 106, 113, 132, 160, 164 

Grey, Henry, earl of Tankerville, 

33, 40, 104 

— , Richard, Lord Powys, 3, 30, 

103, 104, 107-8, 116, 137 
— , Sir Richard, 200 
Griffith, Ellis, 11, 14, 76, 154 
— , Henry, 98, 116, 164 
— , Sir John, 45, 81, 137 
— , Nicholas, 45 
— , Rice, 196 
— , Robert, 190 
— , William, 27, 32, 164, 210, 215 

— ap David ap Thomas, 40 

— ap Ieuan ap Eynon, 144 
ap Iorwerth, 144 

— ap Meredith, 58 
ap Henry, 44 

— ap Nicholas, 4, 5, 10, 12-3, 20, 

23-5. 28 ~9. 33. 39. 4°. 8l . 
90-4, 124, 128-130, 190, 195, 
200, 229 

— ap Richard, 156 

— ap Robin, 164 

Grommys ap Howel ap Morgan, 144 

— ap Ieuan ap Eynon ap Ieuan, 

144 

Gronow, David, 63 
— , William, 150 

Guto'r Glyn, 3, 4, 6, 8, 9. ". 
28-9, 47, 50, 62, 150, 168-71, 
174-5, 177, 179, 181, 183-5, 

193 
Gwenllwg, 216 
Gwent, 97, 100, 138, 175-6 
— , Gwilym, 9, 60, 61, 99 
Gwilym, John, 184 

— ap Ieuan Hen, 12, 23, 129 
Gwladys Ddu, 10, 74, 176 
Gwyn, Henry, 37, 163 
Gwynedd, Rheinallt, 124, 128 

— , Richard, 156 

Hall, 63 

Hampden, Edward, 143 
Hanmer, David, 48 
— , John, 103, 104, 140, 153 
— , William, 153, 194, 210 
Harflete, Geoffrey, 51 
Harfleur, 44, 47, 51-2 
Harlech, 16, 34, 52, 115, 120, 122, 
129, 140, 143-5, 150-5. l62 - 
171, 194, 203 
Hastings, William, Lord, 77, 130, 
136, 138, 149-5°. 176. 186- 
89, 198, 204 



INDEX 



239 



Havard, John, 53 
— , Lewis, 176, 184 
— , Thomas, 176, 184, 227 
— , William, 176, 184 

Haverfordwest, 45, 85, 109, 124, 
147, 163, 190, 203, 210 

Hawarden, 67, 116 

Hay, 123, 147, 169, 189 

Hedgeley Moor, 153 

Henbury, John, 63 

Henry V, 16, 17, 20, 35, 46, 52-3, 
66-7 

— VI, 6, 11, 18, 46-197 

— VII, 7, 10, 11, 13, 68, 92-6, 

107, 147, 153, 170, 192-228 

— ap Griffith, 84, no, 123, 156, 

164 

— ap Gwilym, 97, 100, 129 

— ap Ieuan Gwynne, 63 

— ap Ievan, 44 

— ap Roger, 199 

— ap Thomas, 190 

— ap Walter, 63 
Herbert, Lady, 92, 189 

— , Gilbert, 75 

— , John, 135, 138, 164, 172, 190, 

196, 200 
— , Margaret, 190 
— , Maud, 147, 170 
— , Philip, 210 
— , Sir Richard, 3, 73, 98, 123, 138, 

147, 150, 160, 164, 169, 172, 

176-7, 181-6, 190, 196 
— , Richard, 184 
— , Thomas, 38-40, 74-5, 100, 117, 

135-8, 146, 156, 164, 172, 192 
— , Walter, 215-6, 219-20, 224-5 
— , William, earl of Pembroke, 6, 

8, 11, 21, 39, 44, 45, 52-3, 

57, 60, 73-4, 78, 80-200 
— , William (half-brother of 

William, earl of Pembroke), 

136-8, 163, 176 
— , William, earl of Huntingdon. 

See Huntingdon. 
— , William, son of Sir Richard, 

184, 196, 210, 225 
Herberts, The, 4, 6, 18, 74-8, 98, 

139, 146, 167, 169, 171, 175-6, 

181, 195 
Hereford, 79, 83-4, 89, 97-101, no, 

116, 120-31, 135-7, I 47~ 8 . 

167, 192-200 
— , earl of, 79, 206 
Herle, John, 190 
Hervey, Hoskyn, 176, 184 
Hewes, John, 210 



Hexham, 153 
Hirwaun, 214 
Holt Castle, 76, 116, 149. 152, 

201-3, 215 
Hoord, Roger, 103 
Hope, 137 
Hopkin ap Howel, 210 

— ap Rhys, 124, 128, 152, 172 
Howel, David, 17, 46 

— , John, 156, 172, 196 
— , John ap, 225 
— , Lewis, 63 

— ap David ap Thomas, 39 

— ap Griffith, 51 
ap Howel, 223 

— ap John, 114 

— ap Meredith ap Howel, 156 
Huddleston, John, 210 

— , Sir Richard, 210, 215 
Hugh, Richard, 173 

— ap Jenkyn ap Ievan ap Madoc, 

98 

— ap John, Sir, 141, 214 

— ap Thomas, 40 
Hungerford, Sir Walter, 47, 66 
Huntingdon, 147, 189 

— , William Herbert, earl of, 160, 

201, 210, 214 
Huntley, Hugh, 135, 204 

— , Thomas, 176, 184 
Hutton, Thomas, 206 
Huw Cae Llwyd, 194 

Ievan ap Griffith, 33 

— ap Ievan Gadarn, 109 

— ap Lloyd, 73 

— ap Richard, 44 

— ap Robert ap Meredith, 170 

— ap Tudor ap Owen, 210 
Ireland, 76, 78, 83, 95, 105-6, 125, 

143, 145-6, 149-5°. 159 
Iscennin, 152 
Ivan ap John of Merwyke, 184 

James, The, of Tenby, 63 
Jankyn ap Howel ap Ievan, 156 

— ap Ievan ap Llywelyn, 156 

— ap John ap Rhys, 44 

— ap Iorwerth ap Eynon, 144 

— ap Meurig ap Richard, 44 

— ap Philip, 216-7 
Johannes ap Griffith, 51 

John, abbot of Llaneguyfall, 140 
— , Sir Hugh, 160 
— , Lewis, 20 

— ap Gwilym, 98, 156, 164 

— ap Henry, 44 



240 



INDEX 



John ap Howel ap William, 53 

— ap Ieuan ap Llywelyn, 172, 

227 

— ap Ievan Eynon, 144 

— ap Jankyn, 148, 210 

— ap Jankyn ap Madoc, 156 

— ap Meredith, 31, 164, 221-2 
ap Evan Lloyd, 227 

— ap Morgan ap David Gam, 156 

— ap Rees, 40, 44, 45 

— ap Thomas, 33 

— ap Richard, 98 

— ap Robert, 98 

— ap Thomas, 45 

— ap William, 184 

Kemys, Phillip, 210 

— , William, 210 
Kidwely, 90, 152, 172, 175-6 
Kighley, Sir John, 64 

— , Sir Richard, 45 
Kilpek Castle, 138 
Kilvey, 147 

Knylle, Sir William, 123 
Knyvett, Sir William, 208 
Kyfhn, David, 140 
Kynaston, Sir Roger, 8, 40, 103, 
108, 116, 138, 172, 193-4, 2I ° 

— , Griffith, 103 

— , Philip, 103 

— , William, 103 
Kyriel, Sir Thomas, 50, 58, 60, 74-5 

Lamburston, 163 

Lancaster, duchy of, 26, 78, 152, 

190, 197, 203 
Lancastrians, Chapters v-x 
Landois, Peter, 205, 212 
Latimer, Lord, 174, 180 
La Roche Guyon, 57 
Laugharne, 27, 136, 147, 172 
he George of Sluys, 53 
Le Mans, 51, 54-6 
Lenthal, Sir Rowland, 45, 85 
Leominster, 105, 125-6 
Lewis, Welsh physician, 207, 211 

— , Hugh, 227 

— , Morris, 210 

— , Robert, 64 

— , Thomas, 176, 184 

— , William, 210 

— ap Gwilym ap Thomas, 97 

— ap Meredith, 24, 64 

— ap Rhydderch, 152 
ap Rhys, 151 

— ap Rhys, 128, 124 
Gethin, 64 



Leyshon, Lewis, 23 
Llanbadarn, 32 
Llancarvan, 195 
Llandilo, 151 
Llandovery, 214 
Llanfaes, 18 
Llangenneth, 20 
Llangyfelach, 152 
Llanllwch, 148, 214 
Llanrhidian, 152 
Llanrwst, 169 

Llanstephan, 37, 82, 146, 193, 203 
Llanthony Abbey, 79 
Llantrissant, 100 
Llantwit, 195 
Lloyd, David, 48 
— , — , 128 

— » 227 

Hugh, 156, 172, 210, 228 

John, 45, 156, 172 

Morris, 224 

Owen, 223 

Watkin, 44, 46 

William, 227 
— ap Ievan ap Griffith, David, 33 
Llwyd, Davydd, 3, 4, 8, 166-7, 223 
Llywelyn ap David ap Rhys, 33 
— ap Cliffort, 44 
— , Ithel, 64 
— , Thomas, 24 
— , William, 225 
Losecoat Field, 191 
Lougher, 172 
Ludford, 11, 96-126 
Ludlow, 29, 77—80, 90, 102—8, 

119-20, 138, 197, 200—3 
Luttrell, Sir James, 136, 155 
Lynell, Sir John, 123 

Mabbe, Johannes, 51 
Machen, 216 
Maeliennydd, 79 
Maelor, 48 
Magor, 146, 184 
Maine, 35, 48-56 
Maliphant, Margaret, 23 

— , Sir Thomas, 23 
Maltraeth, 67 
Manorbier, 137, 210, 214 
Mansel, Philip, 95, 120, 124, 128, 
151-2, 172 

— , Thomas, 140-1, 151 
Manselton, 152 

March, earl of. See Edward IV. 
Marches, The, 25-6, 29, 36, 39, 
77-120, 123, 146-8, 167, 192, 
197-8, 200 



INDEX 



241 



Maredydd ap levari ap Rees, 33 

Margam, 33, 112 

Margaret of Anjou, 7, 38, 54, 76— 

144, 150, 162, 191-4 
— , countess of Richmond, 202, 211 
— , dau.of Sir William ap Thomas, 
184 

Marywhite, The, of Tenby, 63 

Mathew, David, 134, 164 
— , Walter, 156 

Maud Herbert, 147, 216 

Maurice ap Griffith, 180 

— ap Meurig, 53 
Meredith, Morgan, 21, 84 

— ap Cynwric, 77 

— ap Gwilym, 176, 184 

— ap Owen GlyDdwr, 18 

— ap William, 63 
Merioneth, 36, 83, 86, 89, 138, 145, 

15°. 153. 163, 164, 167, 172, 
189, 194 
Meurig ap Rhys, 44 
Michael, Henry, 64 
Middleton, David, 148, 164, 196, 
227 

— , John, no, 153 

— , Richard, 40, no 
Miles ap Harry, 44, 98, 199 
Milewater, John, no, 148, 164 
Milford Haven, 13, 82, 125, 203, 

213-216 
Moccas, 147 
Moelwick, 109 
Monmouth, 78-80, 89, 98, 123, 172, 

175, 103, 192, 203 
Montgomery, 67, 116, 137, 156, 164, 

172, 203 
Morgan, David Llywelyn, 209 

— , Edward, 223 

— , Evan, 216 

— , Henry, 176, 184 

— , John, 56 

— , John ap, 215 

— , Sir John, 216, 220 

— , Llywelyn ap, 216 

— , John, Bishop, 217 

— , Thomas ap, 164, 196, 210, 225 

— , Trahaiarn, 216 

— , Walter, 176, 184 

— , William, 176, 184 

— ap Evan ap Jankyn, 27 

— ap Jankyn ap Philip, 164, 217 

— ap Meredith, 22 

— ap Thomas, 190, 195 

— ap Rhydderch, 128 

— ap Roger (Rosser), 27 

— of Kidwely, 216-8 



Morgan Kidwely, 217-8 

— John Philip, 225 
Morgannwg, 78, 109 
Morris ap Rhys, 210 

— ap David ap Griffith, 227 

— ap Owen, 224 

Mortimer, The, 44, 74, 79, 84, 89, 

107, in, 197, 203 
Mortimer's Cross, 7, 8, 11, 13, 75, 

93-4 
Morton, John, 200, 205-8, 212, 218 
Morys, David, 25 

— ap David ap Griffith, 144 
Moyle, John, 137 

Mulle, Sir William, 135-6, 172 
— , Hugh, 197 

Narberth, 83, 90, no, 203, 214 

Neath, 100, 171, 184 

Neville, Richard, earl of Warwick. 

See Warwick. 
Nevilles, The, 53, 78, 79, 85, 102, 

104, 109, 132, 137, 161, 163, 

173, 180, 186 
Newcourt, 84, 199 
Newport, 27, 75, 79, 138, 216 
Newton, 67 
— , Richard, 204, 214 
Nicholas ap Rees, no 
Nicholston, 152 
Norfolk, duke of, 132, 149, 152, 

172 
Norris (Norreys), 36, 77, 141 
Northampton, 79, 103, 113, 123, 

147, 158, 175, 182, 202 

Ormond, earl of, 64, 124-26, 135. 

See Wiltshire. 
Oswestry, 200 
Owen, Sir David, 217, 227 

— , John, no, 197 

— , Richard, 114, 224 

— ap Griffith, 224 

— ap Griffith ap Nicholas, 33-4, 

81, 94-5, 124, 129, 130 

— ap Gwilym, 129 

— ap Jankyn, 44 

— ap Meredith. See Owen Tudor. 

— ap Thomas, 63 

Oxford, earl of, 146, 167, 213, 218 
Oxwich, 152, 209 
Oystermouth, 141 

Pecock, Reginald, 4, 5, 187 
Pembroke, 26, 37, 67, 73-128, 135- 

157. 169-70, 176, 192-214 
Penclauth, 163 



242 



INDEX 



Penkelly (Pengelly), 60, 75, 149, 
172, 210 

Penllyn, Hugh, 64 

Tudur. See Tudur Penllyn. 

Pennally, 137, 214 

Pennarth, 24 

Perot, Thomas, 37 
— , John, 22, 44, 126 
— , Thomas, 124, 196 
— , (Perrott), Jankyn, 185 

Philip, David, 210 

— ap Griffith, 44 

— ap Howel, 224 

— ap Morgan, 210 

— ap Rees (Rhys), 81, 152, 210 

— ap Rhys ap Thomas Vaughan, 

223 
Picton, 154 

Pole, Catherine de la, 72 
Poole, Geoffrey, 84, 85 
Powys, Lord, 170, 210. See also 
Richard Grey. 

— , Lewis, 124, 128 
Presteign, 125-6, 156 
Privy Council, 33-6, 68, 116, 118 
Puleston, John, 140, 192 

— , Robert, 210 

— , Roger, 116, 120, 123, 139, 140, 

151. J53. 173 
Pulle, William, 24 
Pwll Picton, 154 
Pyll, 163 
Pyrton, Sir William, 46, 64 

Radnor, 79, 118, 123, 125, 172, 203, 

215 

Radyr, 156 

Raglan, 78, 80, 136, 163, 145 
— , Ievan, 51 
Ratcliffe, Sir John, 132 
Ravenspur, 192 
Redcliffe, 119 
Redwyk, 146 
Rede, Geoffrey, 224 
Rees ap David ap Thomas, 40 

— ap Rhydderch, 45 

— ap Thomas, 19 

— Vaughan ap Rees, 33 
Rempston, Thomas, 63, 96 
Rhaith, 18 

Rheinallt ap Griffith ap Bleddyn, 

144. 155 

— Davy, 223 
Rhuddlan, n 1 
Rhuvoniog, 11 1 
Rhydderch, Morgan, 210 

— ap Rhys, 223 



Rhys ap Llywelyn, 223 

— ap Madoc, 21 

— ap Philip, 223 

— ap Thomas, Sir, 6, 12, 13, 

23, 200, 210-228 

— ap David, 33 
Rice ap Morgan, 185 

— Llywelyn ap Morgan, 210 
Richard III, 170, 190, 196, 198, 

202-228 
— , Hugh, 225 

— ap Madoc, 48 

— ap Rhys, 44 
172, 196 

— ap Robert, 40 
Richmond, earl of. See Tudor. 
Rivers, earl, 169, 173, 178, 183, 

186, 198, 200-4 
Robert, Morys, 144 

— ap Gwilym ap Thomas, 227 

— ap Howel, 140, 215 

— ap Jankyn, 210 

— ap Rosser, 199 

Robin Ddu, 4, 8-1 1, 70, 127 
Robin of Redesdale, 174 
Roger, John, 84 

— ap John, 173 
Roos, 82 

Ross, 80, 138, 199 
Ruthin, 116. See Grey. 
Rys ap Llywelyn, Gwyn, 44 

St Albans, 37, 39, 79, 82, 85-6, 
117, 121, 130-3 

— Asaph, 153 

— Briavel, 163, 204 

— Ceneri, 50 

— Clear's, 17, 82 

— Fagan's, 195 

— Florence, 82 

— James de Beuvron, 56, 57 

— John's, Carmarthen, 53 

— Field's, 132 

— Nicholas, 82 
Salesbury, 103 

— , Thomas, 164, 210 
Salisbury, earl of, 47-8, 121, 161 
Salop, 116, 137, 167, 190, 198 
Savage, Sir John, 216, 218, 220-1, 

226-7 
Scurla Castle, 152 
Senlis, 50 

Serjeant, William, 210 
Shaunde, Philibert de, 218 
Shrewsbury, 31, 77-80, 89, 96, 102, 
120, 122, 137, 200-1 

— , earl of, 89, 97, 136-7, 172, 196 



INDEX 



M3 



Sion ap Rhys, 129 
Sheen, 86 

Skydmore, Sir John, 13, 47-8, 52, 
91, 95, 101, no, 122, 124, 
128, 137, 140-2, 147 
Skydmores, 35, 89, 122, 124, 151 
Snowdon, 142-3, 168, 172 
Somerset, duke of, 51-194 
Spier, Nicholas, 215 
Stafford, Humphrey, 79, 1 17, 122, 174 

— , 207, 208, 209 
Staffords, 79, 117, 122 
Stanley, Lord, 13, 202, 212, 220 

— , Sir Thomas, 76-7, 82, 103, 115 

— , William, 137, 210, 215, 225 
Stapleton, 148 
Staunton, Thomas, 157 
Steward, John, 20, 63 
Steynton, 163 
Stillington, 198, 205 
Stradling, Edward, 26, 44, 53, 63-4 

— , Henry, 44, 97 

— , John, 74 

— , Sir William, 44 
Strange, Lord, 213, 220 
Strata Florida, 16, 32, 151 
Suffolk, duke of, 38-42, 45, 51, 64, 

69, 72, 76, 95 
Swansea, 141, 147, 152, 172 
Swrdwal, Howel, 74, 128-9, 156 
Symon, William ap, 208-9 

Talbot, Sir John, 31, 35, 45-52, 64 
Talbots, 17, 30, 35, 164, 225, 227 
Talgarth, 53, 216 
Talybolion, 67 

Tenby, 25, 37, 53, 58, 82, 95-6, 
121, 139-141, 146, 195, 203, 210 
Tewkesbury, 193—4 
Thawe, Jenkyn, 40 
Thelwalls, 32 
Thomas, John, 227 

— ap Griffith ap Nicholas, 91, 95, 

124, 130 

— ap David ap William, 63 

— ap Harry, 176, 184 

— ap Henry, 44 

— ap Ieuan ap Eynon, 144 

— ap Jankyn ap Rees, 40 

— ap John, 210 

— ap Madoc, 156 

— ap Morgan, 184 

— ap Prene, 63 

— ap Rosser (Roger), 5, 29, 98, 

147, 164, 176, 183, 184 
— , Watkin, 184 
— , William, 123 



Thorpe Mandeville, 181 

Towton, 130-5, 143, 192 

Towy, 125, 151 

Trahaiarn ap Ievan ap Meurig, 148 

— Henry, 150, 156 

Thomas, 98 

Tregaron, 24 
Tresham, Sir William, 71 
Tretower, 147 
Trevor, John, 140 
Trinity of Minehead, 141 

— of Newport, 63 
Trollope, Andrew, 106-7, *34 
Tudor, Edmund, earl of Richmond, 

7, 11, 13, 67-8, 72, 78, 81-6, 
90-2, 97 

— , Henry. See Henry VII. 

— , Jasper, earl of Pembroke, 3, 7, 

8, 10, 13, 66-8, 72-8, 81-6, 
92-127, 136-7, 140-154, 158, 
192-7, 165-173, 185, 191, 
211-228 

— , Owen, 4, 8-1 1, 21-2, 32, 47, 
66-72, 82, 90, 95, 109, 127-8, 
151. 213 
Tudors, 68, 78, 83-5, 91-2,95-7, 192 
Tudur Penllyn, 3, 4, 12, 154, 165 
Tunstall, Sir Richard, 140, 169 
Turberville, Gilbert, 24 
Tu thill, 143 
Twygeston, 24 
Tyrrel, Sir James, 214 

Upper Wardington, 180-3 
Usk, 26, 84, 98, 109-10, 135, 163, 
203, 210 

Vale Royal, 32 

Vaughan, David, 156, 210, 215 
— , Griffith, 3, 30, 33 

— — of Corsygedol, 140, 154, 165, 

170 
— , Hugh, 217, 224 
— , John, 64 
— , Morgan, 199 
— , Philip, 122-3, 169 
— , Rees, 137, 156 
— , Reginald, 170 
— , Richard, 210, 215 
— , Roger, 208, 210 
— , Sir Roger, of Tretower, 78, 97-8, 

113, 118-23, I2 7. 151- 2 . 164, 

172, 177, 184, 190, 193-6, 200 
— , Roger, of Bredwardine, 46, 129, 

176 
— , Sir Thomas, 148-9, 156, 161, 

198, 202-4 



244 



INDEX 



Vaughan, Thomas (son of Sir Roger), 
147, 196, 207-10, 214-5 

— , Walter, 214-5 

— , Watkin, 46 

— , — of Bredwardine, 128-9 

— , — (son of Sir Roger), 184, 190, 
208 

— , William, 196, 214 
Vaughans, 4, 98, 113, 172, 214, 227 
Vaures, Ievan, 51 
Vawr, John, 199 
Verneuil, 21', 46-8, 54 
Vestynden, Ralph, 134 
Villeinage in Wales, 27, 31 
Vychan, Griffith, 44 

Wakefield, 116, 121-3, 131, 135 
Walter ap David ap John, 225 

— ap Gwilym, 227 

— ap Ievan, 44 

— ap Lewis, 224 
Walwyn's Castle, 136, 146, 203 
Warwick, Richard, earl of, 6, 73-195 
Welsh pedigrees, 73 

— poets, 5-12, 28, 39, 50-2, 91, 99, 

103, 145, 150, 166-8, 171 
Welshpool, 25 

Wenlok, John, 130, 132, 137 
Weobley, 80, 108, 208 
Whitland, 32 
Whitney, Roger, 112 
Whyte, John, 51 
Wigmore, 90, 96, 126, 203 
William Griffith ap Robin, 223 

— ap Griffith, 11, 63 

— ap Hopkin, 156 

— ap Howel ap Thomas, 156 

— ap John, 40 

— ap Morgan, 156 

ap David Gamme, 98 



William ap Norman, 99, 176, 184 

— ap Owen, 109 

— ap Rees, 89 

— ap Thomas, Sir, 40, 46, 52-3, 

74-7. 184 

— — ap Robert, 40 

— ap William ap Griffith, 18, 22 
Williams, Richard, 204, 210, 214, 

218 

— , Nicholas, 225 
Wiltshire, earl of, 38, 86, 136, 146-7. 

See Ormond. 
Wogan, Sir Henry, 38, 40, 45, 91, 
97, 109, 176, 184 

— , Jankyn Lloyd, 40 

— , John, 39, 40, 47, 176, 184 

— , Mathew, 37 

— , William, 40, 44 
Wolf, William, 64 
Woodville, Anthony. See Rivers. 

— , Catherine, 79, 202 

— , Sir Edward, 213 

— , Sir Richard, 206 
Woodvilles, 141, 159, 160, 207 
Worcester, John, earl of, 137, 164 

— , Richard, earl of, 63, 79 
Wrexham, 215 
Wydegada, 86 
Wynfurton, 138 
Wynne, John, 156, 196, 199 

Yale, 147, 215 

Yelverton, Justice, 80 

York, Richard, duke of, 12, 39, 45-6, 
52-4, 75-172 

Yorkists, 6, 13, 89-90, 94, 99-126, 
134, 139, 141, 143, 146, 148, 
195-204, 167, 172, 185-6, 190 

Ytton, 184 



CAMBRIDGE: PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A. AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 




WALES AND THE MARCHES circa 1455. 



SELECTION FROM THE GENERAL CATALOGUE 

OF BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 

THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

History of the Life and Reign of Richard III, to 

which is added the Story of Perkin Warbeck from original docu- 
ments. By James Gairdner, C.B., LL.D. New and enlarged 
edition. Crown 8vo. With two portraits. 8s 6d. 

The Reign of Henry the Fifth. By J. H. Wylie. M.A., 
D.Litt., late H.M. Divisional Inspector of Schools, Ford's Lecturer 
in the University of Oxford, 1899. Royal 8vo. Vol. I, 141 3-1 41 5. 
25s net. 

Studies on Anglo-Saxon Institutions. By H. Munro 
Chadwick, M.A., Professor of Anglo-Saxon in the University of 
Cambridge. Crown 8vo. 8s net. 

British Borough Charters, 1042 — 12 16. The text of the 
charters in Latin, with a translation and introduction. Edited by 
Adolphus Ballard, LL.B., M.A., Town Clerk of Woodstock. 
Royal 8vo. 15s net. 

The English Borough in the Twelfth Century. Being 
Two Lectures delivered in the Examination Schools, Oxford, on 
22 and 29 October, 191 3. By the same author. Crown 8vo. 
3s 6d net. 

The Royal Charters of the City of Lincoln, Henry II 
to William III. Transcribed and Translated with an Introduction 
by Walter De Gray Birch, LL.D., F.S.A. Royal 8vo. With 
5 plates. 12s net. 

National Life and Character in the Mirror of Early 
English Literature. By Edmund Dale, M.A., D.Lit. Royal 8vo. 
8s net. 

Studies in English Official Historical Documents. By 
Hubert Hall, F.S.A. , of H.M. Public Record Office, Reader in 
Palaeography in the University of London. Royal 8vo. 12s net. 

A Formula Book of English Official Historical Docu- 
ments. Edited by Hubert Hall, F.S.A. Part I. — Diplomatic 
Documents. Royal 8vo. 6s net. Part II. — Ministerial and Judicial 
Records. Royal 8vo. 7s 6d net. 

The Constitutional History of England. A Course of 
Lectures delivered by F. W. Maitland, LL.D. Demy8vo. 12s 6d 

Domesday-Book and beyond. Three Essays in the Early 
History of England. By F. W. Maitland, LL.D. Royal 8vo. 15s. 

A Suffolk Hundred in the year 1283. The Assessment of 
the hundred of Blackbourne for a tax of one thirtieth and a return 
showing the land tenure there. Edited by Edgar Powell, author 
of "The Rising in East Anglia in 1381." Royal 8vo. 10s 6d net. 

Early Wars of Wessex. Being Studies from England's 
School of Arms in the West. By Albany F. Major. Edited by 
the late Chas. W. Whistler, M.R.C.S. Demy 8vo. With 22 
maps, plans and diagrams. 10s 6d net. 

continued overleaf 



SELECTION FROM THE GENERAL CATALOGUE 

OF BOOKS PUBLISHED BY 

THE CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS 

History of the Life and Reign of Richard III, to 

which is added the Story of Perkin Warbeck from original docu- 
ments. By James Gairdner, C.B., LL.D. New and enlarged 
edition. Crown 8vo. With two portraits. 8s 6d. 

The Reign of Henry the Fifth. By J. H. Wylie. M.A., 
D.Litt., late H.M. Divisional Inspector of Schools, Ford's Lecturer 
in the University of Oxford, 1899. Royal 8vo. Vol. I, 1413-1415. 
25s net. 

Studies on Anglo-Saxon Institutions. By H. Munro 
Chadwick, M.A., Professor of Anglo-Saxon in the University of 
Cambridge. Crown 8vo. 8s net. 

British Borough Charters, 1042 — 1216. The text of the 
charters in Latin, with a translation and introduction. Edited by 
Adolphus Ballard, LL.B., M.A., Town Clerk of Woodstock. 
Royal 8vo. 15s net. 

The English Borough in the Twelfth Century. Being 
Two Lectures delivered in the Examination Schools, Oxford, on 
22 and 29 October, 191 3. By the same author. Crown 8vo. 
3s 6d net. 

The Royal Charters of the City of Lincoln, Henry II 
to William III. Transcribed and Translated with an Introduction 
by Walter De Gray Birch, LL.D., F.S.A. Royal 8vo. With 
5 plates. 12s net. 

National Life and Character in the Mirror of Early 
English Literature. By Edmund Dale, M.A., D.Lit. Royal 8vo. 
8s net. 

Studies in English Official Historical Documents. By 

Hubert Hall, F.S.A. , of H.M. Public Record Office, Reader in 
Palaeography in the University of London. Royal 8vo. 12s net. 

A Formula Book of English Official Historical Docu- 
ments. Edited by Hubert Hall, F.S.A. Part I. — Diplomatic 
Documents. Royal 8vo. 6s net. Part II. — Ministerial and Judicial 
Records. Royal 8vo. 7s 6d net. 

The Constitutional History of England. A Course of 
Lectures delivered by F. W. Maitland, LL.D. Demy8vo. 12s 6d 

Domesday-Book and beyond. Three Essays in the Early 
History of England. By F. W. Maitland, LL.D. Royal 8vo. 15s. 

A Suffolk Hundred in the year 1283. The Assessment of 
the hundred of Blackbourne for a tax of one thirtieth and a return 
showing the land tenure there. Edited by Edgar Powell, author 
of "The Rising in East Anglia in 1381." Royal 8vo. 10s 6d net. 

Early Wars of Wessex. Being Studies from England's 
School of Arms in the West. By Albany F. Major. Edited by 
the late Chas. W. Whistler, M.R.C.S. Demy 8vo. With 22 
maps, plans and diagrams. 10s 6d net. 

continued overleaf 



The Divine Right of Kings. By J. Neville Figgis, Litt.D. 

Second edition, with three additional essays. Crown 8vo. 6s net. 

The Puritans in Power. A Study in the History of the 
English Church from 1640 to 1660. By G. B. Tatham, M.A., 
Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge. Demy 8vo. 7s 6d net. 

Personal and Party Government. A Chapter in the 
Political History of the early years of the reign of George III, 
1 760-1 766. By D. A. Winstanley, M.A., Fellow and Lecturer 
of Trinity College, Cambridge. Crown 8vo. 4s 6d net. 

Lord Chatham and the Whig Opposition. By D. A. 

Winstanley, M.A. Demy 8vo. With a frontispiece. 7s 6d net. 

History of Scotland. By P. Hume Brown, M.A., LL.D., 

Historiographer- Royal for Scotland, and Fraser Professor of 
Ancient (Scottish) History and Palaeography in the University of 
Edinburgh. In three volumes. Crown 8vo. Half Morocco, gilt 
top, 2 is net; or in cloth as follows: 

Vol. I. To the Accession of Mary Stewart. With 7 maps. 
4s 6d net. 

Vol. II. From the Accession of Mary Stewart to the Revolution 
of 1689. With 4 maps and plan. 4s 6d net. 

Vol. III. From the Revolution of 1689 to the Disruption, 1843. 
4s 6d net. 

Ireland, 1494 — 1905. By W. O'Connor Morris. Revised, 

with an additional Chapter (1868-1905), Notes, &c, by Robert 
Dunlop, M.A. Crown 8vo. With map. 4s 6d net. 

Outlines of English Industrial History. By the Ven. 
W. Cunningham, D.D., and Ellen A. M c Arthur, Lecturer of 
Girton College. Crown 8vo. Third edition. 3s net. 

A Short History of the Expansion of the British 
Empire, 1500-1911. By William Harrison Woodward, Christ 
Church, Oxford. Third edition, enlarged. Crown 8vo. With 
10 maps. 4s. 

An Outline History of the British Empire from 1500 

to 191 1. With 6 maps. By the same author, is 6d net. 

Canada under British Rule, 1760 — 1905. By Sir John 
G. Bourinot, K.C.M.G., LL.D., Litt.D. Revised, with an 
additional section by G. M. Wrong, M.A., Professor of Modern 
History in the University of Toronto. Crown 8vo. With 8 maps. 
4s 6d net. 

A History of the Australasian Colonies, from their 

foundation to the year 191 1. By Edward Jenks, M.A. Third 
edition. Crown 8vo. With 2 maps. 6s net. 

History of England for Use in Schools. By Arthur 
D. Innes, M.A. With 13 maps and 8 plans. Crown 8vo. 4s 6d. 
Or in Three Parts. 2s each. Part I. to 1509 a.d. Part II. 1509- 
1714A.D. Part III. 1689-1912 a.d. Also separate part containing 
From the Wars of the Roses to the Death of Elizabeth. 2s. 

A Source Book of English History for Use in Schools. 

By A. D. Innes, M.A. In two volumes. Vol. I. 597-1603 a.d. 
With 31 illustrations. 4s 6d. Vol. II. 1603-1815 a.d. With 21 
illustrations. 3s 6d. 

Cambridge University Press 

C. F. Clay, Manager: Fetter Lane, London 



14 DAY USE 

RETURN TO DESK FROM WHICH BORROWED 

LOAN DEPT. 

This book is due on the last date stamped below, or 

on the date towhich renewed. 

Renewed books argAdfliect to immediate recall. 




JAN 04 1333 



. 



18 



FEB 31W9 



fi K.CIR. FEB 14 1979 



INTERUBRARV irvw 



■m 



-WAV 



•'. f i 1990 



UNIV.OFCAUI-JJEm 



LD 21A-60m-4,'64 
(E4555sl0)476B 



GemrSfiAbtary 
University of California '32 
Berkeley 



«* KOmiYUBUm 




C °033 4 ^« 




y 



331684 



UNIVERSITY OF CAUFORNIA LIBRARY 






